The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gaudenzia, Pride of the Palio, by
Marguerite Henry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Gaudenzia, Pride of the Palio

Author: Marguerite Henry

Illustrator: Ward Lynd

Release Date: April 6, 2022 [eBook #67783]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAUDENZIA, PRIDE OF THE
PALIO ***





                               Gaudenzia

                          Pride of the Palio

                          By MARGUERITE HENRY

                       Illustrated by Lynd Ward

                        RAND McNALLY & COMPANY
                    Chicago New York San Francisco

               Copyright 1960 by Rand McNally & Company

          Copyright 1960 under International Copyright Union
                       by Rand McNally & Company

                          All rights reserved

            Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 60-8264

                            Edition of 1960

                                   A

             LITHOGRAPHED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                   *       *       *       *       *

                 _To the half-bred Arabian, Gaudenzia,
                   and to her boy trainer, Giorgio,
                          who lived this book
                         with honor and valor_

                   *       *       *       *       *




                               CONTENTS


                         I The First Signpost

                        II The Umbrella Man

                       III Bianca, the Blind One

                        IV A Newborn

                         V The Flying Centaur

                        VI Giorgio Meets a Snail

                       VII Bring Out the Satchel!

                      VIII Over the Mountain

                        IX The Cart Horse of Casalino

                         X A Buyer of Ox Skins

                        XI The Ghost in the Warehouse

                       XII Rejected

                      XIII The Goddess Fortuna

                       XIV At the Curve of San Martino

                        XV The Odd Pieces Again

                       XVI The Rabbit's Foot and the Horn

                      XVII Gaudenzia, Joy of Living

                     XVIII Back Home to the Maremma

                       XIX No Morning Glory

                        XX A Simple Plan

                       XXI Half-bred

                      XXII Speak! Speak!

                     XXIII The Hours Before

                      XXIV Have You Fear? Have You Fear?

                       XXV Behold, the Palio!

                      XXVI Victor of the Piazza

                     XXVII A Time to Seek

                    XXVIII All Roads Lead to Rome

                      XXIX The Three Acts

                       XXX Duel Between Horse and Man

                      XXXI At the Victory Dinner

                           And Now ...




                               Foreword


For months I wrote the story of the Palio in my mind. I pictured a
fearless boy rider in this wildest of all horse races, a boy who dared
defy the ancient rules and _willed_ his horse to win--in spite of the
strict orders of his captain.

When I finally went to Siena and faced the real battle of the Palio,
I had to scuttle my preconceived plot. No rider, no matter how brave,
would ever defy the ancient rules of the race. They are as firm and
immutable as the walls of the city.

But the story I found was of heroic proportions, much bigger than the
one I had dreamed. A peasant boy, named Giorgio Terni, and a half-bred
Arabian mare seemed pawns of fate, doomed to a life of tragedy. Their
battle to outwit destiny is a drama of human and animal courage.

The secret plotting of the Palio is so strange that I had to journey
from America to Siena three times in order to understand the inner
workings. There is a need in the people to relive the past, a need so
intense that they change themselves into knights and noblemen of the
Middle Ages for a brief moment each year.

While I was there, I myself became embroiled in the passion of the
Palio. I attended the solemn ritualistic banquet on the eve of the
race, and afterward I went with Giorgio Terni and his bodyguards to
listen to music in the heart of the Piazza, and I went with him into
the stable of the mare, Gaudenzia. I wanted to study this courageous
youth who was fully aware that tomorrow his blood and that of his mount
might crimson the race course.

I visited with Giorgio's parents, too, and with his brother and sister
in the huddled village of Monticello, far away in the Maremma country.
Because I spoke no Italian we had to communicate in pantomime, but it
was more exciting than any game of charades. It concerned life, and
death.

Twice I watched spellbound the pageant-parade on Palio day, and twice I
shouted and prayed during the breakneck race that Gaudenzia would sweep
wildly through the pack to victory.

Dozens of people--cobblers and captains, peasants and princes--gave of
their time and energy to help make this book an authentic recreation of
the oldest horse race in the long history of the sport of kings.

At last I understood that the Palio is a fire banked but never
quenched. Every summer it blazes anew into a festival of such drama and
color that the characters who take part might have stepped out of the
Middle Ages.

                                                       MARGUERITE HENRY




                               Gaudenzia

                          Pride of the Palio




                               CHAPTER I

                          The First Signpost


In a hill town of Italy, close by the Tyrrhenian Sea, lives the boy,
Giorgio Terni. He is slight of build but hard-muscled and lithe,
with dark wavy hair and amber eyes the color of a young fox's. His
town, Monticello Amiata, is named for nearby Mount Amiata. But the
countryside that dips down to the sea is known as the Maremma, or
"marshy place." It was once wild and desolate, and it bred strong,
earthy men who grappled their living from the wetlands.

In the rest of Italy, people still think of the Maremma as a savage,
wind-blown place where land and sea are not yet separated. They have
heard that only work horses and bullocks are reared there, and the
people who survive the fever-laden mosquitoes are wild as the sea that
goes to meet the sky.

But now things are changing. The bogs and sea ponds are being ditched
and drained, and the tangle of brown swamp grass is giving way to
fields of golden wheat, and to olive groves and vineyards.

Giorgio's father is one of the new farmers. He cultivates a narrow
strip of land, and at harvest time pays a little money to the state so
that in twenty or thirty years it will be his. But at heart the new
farmers remain unchanged. The love of animals is strong in their blood,
and they tell with pride that the horses of the Maremma stand taller
and and show more stamina than those bred elsewhere.

It was in Giorgio's thirteenth year that he resolved to make animals
his life. Two experiences came to him in swift succession--one brutal,
one tantalizing. When he thought about them later, he knew they were
signposts, pointing the way to his future.

Work-hardened and tough as he was, the first one shook him like a
thunderbolt. He was driving Pippa, his donkey, from the hilltop village
of Monticello down to the valley of his father's farmland. It was
a clear, bright day, with only a capful of wind. Spring was in the
air--grapevines sending out new runners, swallows hunting straws.

Then all at once the bright morning went black with horror. Near a
wayside shrine Giorgio came upon a swineherd mercilessly beating a
small, shaggy donkey. With each blow the dust rose in little clouds
from the donkey's back. As Giorgio drove up, he saw that the creature
was trying to lunge away, but he was tied fast to a tree. The sight
threw the boy into a blinding rage. He jumped from the cart and caught
at the rope.

"Stop it!" he shouted to the swineherd. "You'll kill him!"

The man turned in surprise, sweat dripping from the beardy stubble on
his chin. He jerked the rope from Giorgio's hand. "Why not kill him?"
he bawled out. "Too stubborn he is to live!" Taking a fresh hold on the
stick, he hit the donkey across the rump, the back, the ears.

"Stop!" Giorgio shouted again. He braced his feet. His arm muscles went
hard and tight. He waited for the stick to crack across his face. But
it did not come. It kept right on flogging the mouse-colored donkey,
_a-whack_, _a-whing_, and _a-whack_, until with a grunt more sob than
bray, he fell to his knees.

Giorgio crouched over the poor beast and stroked his head. Nearby he
saw two crates filled with squealing pigs. He gave the swineherd a
scornful look. "Let _me_ load your donkey," he cried. "Let _me_ drive
him to market."

With one arm the man flung the boy out of his path, then came stalking
at him, making bull's horns of his first and fourth fingers. He thrust
them almost into Giorgio's eyes. "You meddling runt! How'd you like the
stick against _your_ hide! Run for your life, or I...." His hand came
up in a threat.

Giorgio stood his ground. He was only a little afraid. He hated the
smell of the sweat-dripping man.

Something in the boy's face made the man change his mind. He threw the
stick far off into the field. "All right, you runt!" He spat the words
between his yellowed teeth. "You so smart, _you_ load Long-ears! _You_
drive my shoats to market."

"I will! But first I drive Pippa to our farm." The boy ran back to his
cart, lifted Pippa's head with the lines, and down the road the donkey
clippety-clopped as if there were no time to lose. Giorgio glanced back
to make sure the swineherd would wait. The man had flopped down in a
slab of shade made by the shrine. He was mopping his face and at the
same time pulling a plug of tobacco from his pocket.

The farm was only a kilometer away, and Giorgio soon returned on foot.
With tiny new carrots and a pocketful of grain, he coaxed the donkey to
his feet. Carefully he loaded him with the crates of pigs, making sure
the ropes did not bind, and he tucked rags under the pack to cushion
the weight against the sores. Then slowly he led the donkey to market,
talking and praising him all the way. The swineherd, sullen and silent,
plodded along behind.

Three times that week Giorgio worked Long-ears, and he neither kicked
nor balked. He seemed to know a friend was leading him. He accepted
each load meekly, as if it were the sun or the rain. He even let
himself be ridden, the boy sitting far back between the crates singing
"_Fu-ni-cu-li! Fu-ni-cu-la!_" at the top of his lungs.

The market men poked fun at the swineherd. "Giorgio, he makes cuckoo of
you!" they laughed in his face. "Long-ears is fine worker, for the boy."

The taunts enraged the man, and when no one was looking, he continued
to take out his fury on the donkey. There came a morning when the
little beast no longer felt the pain of the floggings. He was dead.

When the news reached Giorgio, he stopped what he was doing and made
a hard fist of his right hand. Then he struck the palm of his other
hand again and again, until the stinging made him quit. The hurt
somehow helped him feel better, as if he had delivered the blows to the
swineherd's fat, dripping face.

On the surface, life went on as before. Giorgio worked in the fields
with his father and his younger brother, Emilio. And he worked for his
mother and his sister, fetching water in great copper pitchers from
the street fountain, and carrying trays of neatly shaped dough to the
public bake oven. But he thought often of the swineherd's cruelty.

One noontime when he and his father had stopped their span of white
bullocks, he spoke in great seriousness. "_Babbo_," he asked, "you will
not laugh if I tell you what I will do when I have a few more years?"

"I will not laugh," the father replied as he opened Giorgio's schoolbag
that now served as lunchbag.

"You promise it?"

"I promise."

The boy accepted the hunk of bread and the wild boar sausage the father
offered. Then his arm made a great arc toward the mountains. "Some
day," he said in a hushed tone, "I will be a trainer of animals, not
just donkeys. And I will climb Mount Amiata and live in the land on the
other side."

The father nodded as he chewed. Young boys' heads were full of dreams.
He had once dreamed of leaving the Maremma country himself. "It costs
dear to travel," he warned.

"That I know, Babbo, but I will have my own horse and he will take me."
Giorgio's imagination was on fire. "Everyone will try to buy him. For
me he will walk forward or backward, trot or gallop, or spin around in
a circle. All this he will do--not in fear, but because he wants to
please me."

"For you, my son, I hope all comes true. But do you forget that times
are hard and your Babbo has to sell horseflesh for eating, not riding?"

Giorgio was only half listening; he was on a big-going horse, sailing
right over the cone of Mount Amiata.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the swineherd and his donkey had planted a seed in Giorgio's mind,
it was the Umbrella Man who made it grow. He came yodeling into
Monticello one misting morning three months later.

"_Om-brel-lai-o-o-o!_" His voice rang out strong and clear as the bell
in the church tower. "_Om-brel-lai-o-o-o!_ I doctor the broken ribs! I
patch and mend! Pots and pans, and china, too. _Om-brel-lai-o-o-o!_"
And he strung out the word until it rolled and bounced from house to
house.

Shutters flew open, heads popped out of windows. A crock of geraniums
fell with a crash on the cobblestones below. Children danced for joy,
old men brandished their canes like batons. Giorgio, who had been
filling pitchers at the public fountain, ran for home, spilling the
water as he flew.

"_Mammina!_" he cried as he burst into the kitchen. "He is here! Uncle
Marco, the Umbrella Man!"

His mother turned away from the stove, smiling. It was good for a
change to have Giorgio seem more boy than man. She took from the
opposite wall, next to the family's hats and caps, an enormous green
umbrella with a loose hanging fold made by a broken rib. "The tinker
man works magic if he can fix this," she laughed.

In a flash Giorgio was at the door, umbrella in hand.

"Wait, son! Wait!" She looked at the eager boy and quickly counted in
her mind the pieces of money in the sugar pot--the soldi and the lire.
Yes, if she carried the big red hen and one or two rabbits to market,
there would again be the same money in the pot.

She went to the end of the narrow room that served as kitchen, dining,
and living room. Opening the bottom doors of a tall cupboard, she took
out the broken pieces of a bake dish. It was the one, Giorgio saw, that
he had clumsily dropped on the stone floor. Next she counted out a
hundred lire.

"Now then," she said, putting the money and the broken dish into his
hands, "go quickly. With the umbrella _and_ the bake dish to mend, you
can ask more questions than anyone who brings just the umbrella. You
are happy, no?"

Thinking of the cost, Giorgio looked at his mother in astonishment.
Ever since the incident of the donkey she had tried in little ways to
make up for his sorrow. She had fried crispy hot _fritelle_ for him
when it wasn't even a feast day. And only last night he had found under
his pillow the last piece of nougat left from Christmas. Now this joy!
For it was Uncle Marco's rule that whoever brought him the most work
could ask the most questions.

"_Si! Si!_" he answered, kissing her soundly on the cheek. Then he
threw back his head, and whinnying like a King Horse ran joyously out
of the house.




                              CHAPTER II

                           The Umbrella Man


On the edge of the public fountain, where three narrow lanes come
together, the Umbrella Man sat perched like some Robin Hood alighted
only for the moment. He wore a brimmed hat with the tail feathers of
a cock pheasant stuck through the felt. His shoes were brown leather
curled upward at the toes, and the soles were of wood, rubbed shiny.
When he lifted his arms one could tell that his jacket had once been
bright green. Now it was powdered by dust--not gray dust, not brown,
but tawny red--testimony to long days of walking the hills of Tuscany.

Yet with all his traveling the Umbrella Man showed no sign of
weariness. His eyes, dark and beady, sparkled in delight, as if this
were a day he had long awaited, as if it held a special quality, rare
and magical.

"_Buon giorno! Buon giorno!_" He opened wide his arms to welcome his
friends who came laughing and breathless to greet him. One other boy
brought a sagging umbrella, and a girl carried a pitcher with a broken
snout. They, with Giorgio, placed their crippled possessions at his
feet, like precious offerings laid before a god.

Before starting to work, Uncle Marco looked from face to face, beaming.
He was actor as well as tinker. He had certain little curtain-raiser
habits to whet the excitement. First he made a ritual of taking off his
hat, running his fingers over the bright glinting feathers, and putting
it back on again at a rakish angle. Then while his audience watched in
growing impatience, he took a copper mug from his pocket, and let the
fountain water flow into it. He drank long and heartily, sucking the
water through his ragged red whiskers with a loud hissing sound.

"_Bello! Bello!_" he sang out. "No water so delicious as water of
Monticello!" His voice rolled strong and vibrant, full of the juices
of living. "_Bello, bello_--Monticello!" he sang again, clapping his
hands, chuckling over his rhyme.

At last, with a grand flourish, he unhooked the pack on his back and
spread out its contents on the cobblestones.

The children craned their necks to see umbrella ribs made of canewood,
patches of green and black and purple cloth, rolls of thin wire, an old
fish tin, a needle curved like a serpent's tongue, and a wondrous drill
that looked for all the world like a bow and arrow. With a jovial wink
in Giorgio's direction, the Umbrella Man now took up the broken bake
dish.

"Giorgio Terni!" he pronounced in his best stage voice. "With you we
begin. Of the world beyond the mountain, what is it you want to know?
Ask, boy."

Giorgio's heart beat wildly. He swallowed; he gulped. Emilio, his
little brother, and Teria, his sister, crowded in on him, nudging him
with their elbows. "Ask it!" they urged. "Ask!"

Giorgio knew what to ask, but he muffled and stammered the words so
they ran all together. "YoujustcomefromSiena?" he whispered.

"Eh? Speak out. Speak out, boy! _Forte!_"

"You just come from over the mountain? From city of Siena?" This time
the question could be heard by everyone, even by people leaning out the
windows.

The pheasant feathers danced and nodded a vigorous "yes," and the
twinkling black eyes looked up, encouraging the next question.

"You see the big horse race? The _Palio_?"

"I see it, all right. I see both July _and_ August Palio!"

Everyone pressed close, heads canted, listening.

A spotted pig wandered into the crowd, snuffling and snorting, but
went unnoticed. All eyes were fixed on the Umbrella Man, watching
fascinated, as slowly, deliberately, he worked on the bake dish. First
he loosened the bowstring of the drill. Then he sawed away clockwise,
then counterclockwise, making the tip of the arrow drill a neat little
hole in the dish.

Impatience mounted while he drilled three more holes and inspected each
one carefully, nodding in approval.

"We wire and glue later. Now then," he sighed, with a glance to the
far-off hills. "Now I carry everyone over the mountain to old, walled
city of Siena!" He opened up the big green umbrella as if they could
all hang onto the spokes and fly away together.

"The Palio," he began, taking a deep breath, "is fierce battle _and_
race all at same time. If I tell you, you must listen. Even if it
makes the hairs on your spine to quiver. Even if you do not believe it
can be so!"

The fountain place was so still that the drip-drip from the spigot
sounded like hammer strokes.

"Anciently," he went on, "in old, old times before anyone remembers,
city of Siena was very powerful nation."

Giorgio nodded to himself. This was going to be good. Not a tall tale
but a true one.

"Inside her high old walls she is divided like inside this umbrella.
Only instead of cloth and ribs, she is divided sharp and clean into
districts called _contradas_."

Giorgio opened his mouth. "Do they have names?"

"Oh, splendid names--mostly for animals. One contrada is the Dragon,
another the Panther, the Eagle, the Porcupine, the Wolf, the Owl. Like
that," he said, ticking them off on his nimble fingers. "Seventeen they
number in all."

The pig came back, stole a piece of apple from a child's fingers,
and scampered away again. But the child did not even whimper. There
was just the Umbrella Man, his eyes hypnotic, his voice carrying his
audience along, farther and farther from Monticello.

"In Middle Ages, each contrada was great military company of knights in
armor, and each had beautiful flag with emblem in gold. And they fought
blood wars."

Suddenly the Umbrella Man's face beaded in sweat. His skin paled.

"Uncle Marco! What is it?" an elderly man asked anxiously. "Are you
sick?"

"No, no." He narrowed his eyes and leaned forward. "How can I explain
how fierce, how strong, how loyal are feelings in each contrada even to
this day?" He shook his head in despair. "Just for suppose: A father
belongs to the Contrada of the Panther, the mother to the Dragon, one
son to the Eagle, the other to the Ram. You see, it's where you're born
that makes you Eagle or Ram or Panther or Dragon."

He stopped to blot the perspiration with a bright red handkerchief.

"How do I explain? All year long this family lives together in happy
feelings. Then come the preparations for the Palio, and--_pffft!_--they
are enemies! In the father the Panther blood runs like fever. He
forgets home; he goes to the meetings. Every afternoon, every night, in
every spare time he joins the other Panthers. They make questions. 'Who
will be our jockey in the Palio race?' 'Shall we make the alliances
with other contradas?' 'Who shall paint with gold the hoofs of our
horse if we win?' 'Who shall be in charge of our Victory Dinner?'

"And Mamma? She is not like Mamma at all. She lets the spaghetti burn.
She snips and sews all day for the Dragon--mending their silken banners
and the velvet costumes for the parade.

"Mind you," Uncle Marco shook his forefinger wildly, "some costumes
were designed by Leonardo da Vinci! No wonder the Mamma's hands tremble
while she works ... so great the honor is!"

Giorgio interrupted. "Uncle Marco! What about the two brothers?"

"Well, those boys, they grow warlike against each other and their
father must separate them; he sends them to stay with friends or
cousins in their special contradas."

"For both Palios?"

"For both!" The man shrugged helplessly. "Who can understand this
mystic feeling--mad, wonderful?" He waved his hand in staccato rhythm.
"It is war! It is history! It is religion! All year long the Palio is
a fire banked. Then it stirs; it blazes; it comes like flames sweeping
down the centuries. Oh, how beautiful the faces light up and the voices
sing and the banners wave!" He closed his eyes to see it all the
better, and the quiet was like an intermission, only no one stirred.

Giorgio waited in a torment of suspense until at last he had to break
through. "But Uncle Marco! Speak of the race! _Please!_"

The man shook off his trance. "I enter into that now." He shivered in
excitement. "First comes the story parade. Is it a common parade?" he
bellowed to his rapt audience.

"No!" they roared in reply.

With an elfish chuckle, he clapped his hands approvingly. "Siena," he
sucked in a long breath, "lives upon remembrance of her ancient glory.
Each year, for seven hundred years, she is celebrating the Victory of
Montaperti. Even the gold battle car is there in the parade. And the
people watch in awe, remembering their blood is the blood of their
fathers shed to win that battle."

"But the race! The race!" Giorgio insisted.

"All right! All right! When the parade is over, a bomb explodes _bang_!
And out come the horses wearing the bright colors of their contradas.
Away they go like quiver of arrows shot all at once. Around the town
square--one time, two times, three times! And the _fantinos_ who ride
them sit bareback. They cling like the monkey. They risk life. Heads
broken. Shoulders. Legs. Arms. Only the brave...."

"Uncle Marco!" cried Giorgio. "Must the fantinos belong to a contrada?"

"No, no! They are outsiders, from beyond the city walls. But listen!"
He lowered his voice to a whisper. "That race course is death trap. Up,
down, up, down, and around sharp curves. Dizzy-high buildings come so
close they bump the horses, almost.

"But now comes the best part!" His voice rose in power and excitement.
"If the fantino falls off, the horse can win all by himself--_if_...."

"If what?" the children cried.

"If no one has knocked off his _spennacchiera_."

The children's eyes popped. "His _what_?"

Uncle Marco pushed back his hat and held three fingers upright against
his forehead. "This is my spen-nac-chie-ra," and he spun out the
syllables until they seemed to have springs in them. "You see, my
friends, it is like colored plumes in the headband of each horse. It is
the badge of his contrada."

With his free hand he now picked up an umbrella rib. "This is my
_nerbo_," he explained. "It is fierce whip of ox hide, used always by
fantinos since olden years." In make-believe anger he used it to whack
his fingers away from his forehead.

Emilio and the younger children all made imaginary plumes of their
fingers and some tried to knock off their neighbor's until the audience
was in a shrieking uproar.

While Uncle Marco waited for quiet, he went to work on the green
umbrella, snipped out the offending rib, and with the long, curved
needle sewed a new one in place.

Giorgio watched with unseeing eyes. He was still far away in Siena.
When the noise died down he said, "Uncle Marco, the contrada that wins,
what does it win?"

"What does it win! Why, it wins the _Palio_, the silken banner!"

"Only a banner?"

The needle went in and out, fast and faster, and the man's face
darkened in displeasure. "_Only_ a banner! How can you say it? The
picture of the Madonna is hand-painted on it! Why, the winning of the
banner is like...." He rummaged around in his mind for something big
enough ... "is like finding the Holy Grail."

"Oh." Giorgio's face went red. He lowered his head in embarrassment.

The time for asking questions was nearly up. The Umbrella Man was
mixing cement in the old fish tin, gluing the broken dish together,
fastening it through the drilled holes with fine wire. While his
fingers worked, his eye stole a glance now and then at Giorgio.

"Maybe some year you go to Siena? You see a Palio?"

Giorgio's head jerked up. Of course he would go! Then his eyes widened
in sudden panic. Suppose the race stopped before he had saved enough
money. Suppose next year, or the next, there should be no Palio!

He spoke his fears aloud.

"Ho! Ho!" The Umbrella Man rocked with laughter. "Palio has always
been! That is fine reason why it always will be. You go _any_ year.
Time only sharpens the appetite."

       *       *       *       *       *

At sundown that evening, with the mended dish put away in the cupboard
and the umbrella, good as new, hanging on its peg, Giorgio stood before
the window at the end of the long room. It was flung wide to the hills
of Tuscany, but the boy did not see the trees flaming from the touch of
sun, nor the swallows tumbling in the sky, nor the mountains growing
bluer with the oncoming night. All he saw was the clay model of the
horse in his hands. As he pinched and shaped the legs to a breedy
fineness, a piece of leftover clay fell to the floor. He picked it up,
examining it in disbelief. Did he imagine, or could _anyone_ see it for
what it was?

"Emilio! Teria!" he called. "Come here! Come and see!"

He held up the fanlike piece of clay, the smaller end between his thumb
and forefinger, and he moved it toward the head of the horse. "What is
it?" he asked, scarcely daring to breathe.

"Why, it's a spen-nac-chie-ra!" the answer came in chorus. "A
spen-nac-chie-ra!"

Giorgio laughed out loud. He moistened his finger tips and firmly
pressed the bit of clay on the poll of the horse's head. "Let no
fantino knock it off!" he spoke to the little image. "You win all by
yourself, you hear?"

Already the seed of the Palio was bursting in its furrow.




                              CHAPTER III

                         Bianca, the Blind One


After the Umbrella Man left, there was a sense of urgency in the way
Giorgio lived and worked. If he was to become a fantino in the Palio,
or a horse trainer, or only a groom, he must grow hard, wiry, quick;
and stronger than boys twice his size.

His mother and father could not understand the change in their eldest.
Instead of turning over for an extra sleep in the morning, he was up
before the sun--feeding the cats in the kitchen, clanking the copper
pitchers as he went to fetch the drinking water, graining Pippa,
mending harness.

And when the cocks had only begun to crow, he was already at the door
with the donkey hitched to the cart. Together he and his father went
whistling off into the morning.

It was only nine kilometers to their farm, but the road wound down
through stern country. Pippa was trail-wise. Where the footing was good
she went trotting along, ears flopping, tail swinging; but through
the tangled brake where the wild boar lurked, she kept her head down,
watchful, snuffing. Of the few hovels they passed she always remembered
the one where the swineherd and his poor donkey had lived; there she
slowed her steps and gave out a sad, wheezy bray. Giorgio's whistling
stopped, for he remembered, too. Then he looked away, looked at the
great dark hulk of Mount Amiata, and knew that on the other side the
morning sun was warming the foot-hills and somewhere there in the
brightness was the ancient, walled city of Siena. The very name made
his hairs stir. It was like a finger beckoning to him, urging him to
hurry in his growing.

He always sat up straight then and called out, "Pippa! Get along! We go
to work."

Plash! Plash! Pippa's feet plunged through the ditch at the edge of
their farm, clambered up the other side, and headed for the barn.

To Giorgio, his whole life seemed wrapped up in the big barn made
of bricks and straw. Here were the horses his father bought and
sold--sometimes five, sometimes seven--and here were the team of white
bullocks, and the milk-cow, and a frisky goat and her twin kids. With
a sad sort of smile Babbo each morning encouraged Giorgio to grain the
horses well, for the more fat on their bones the better price they
would bring.

There was one mare, however, that Giorgio fed meagerly, for he loved
her most and wanted no one to buy her. She was steel-gray with lively
ears and enormous eyes, but they were blind. He felt guilty in his
heart when he grained the others; it was like sending them to their
death. But he felt guiltier still when he gave only small measure to
Bianca, the blind one. Her ribs showed when he cleaned her off, and
when he rode her, his legs could feel each one separately. He took to
sitting well forward to ease his conscience. Then he was scarcely any
weight at all.

To make up for the scanty meals, he often brought her fistfuls of
clover. And in her stall the straw bedding was always the deepest.

One day Giorgio's father, pointing to Bianca, said, "That one is a
terrible sorrow to me. It is not enough she is blind and unable to
work. But besides, she does not fatten."

"Give her time, Babbo."

"Time! Already dozens of horses come and go, but Bianca, she stays. And
only from pity I took her. I say to myself, 'We give her two, three
weeks of good eating; then we let her go.'" The father shook his head,
frowning. "A blind mare, she is good for nothing."

"Maybe," Giorgio ventured, "she could make a good colt."

"No, no. Her colts, too, could come blind. And she is not good for the
riding, either."

"Oh, but she is! She is more sure-footed than...." Giorgio suddenly
broke off his praise. If anyone knew how big-going she was and how
willing and trustful, she would be sold in a hurry to some traveler,
or even as a race horse. Then he would never see her again. Never ride
her again. Never feel her lips nuzzling his neck to make sure that
he was _he_! "Yes," he nodded in agreement, "it is too bad about the
blind one." And he became very busy, mucking out her stall to hide his
blushing.

Giorgio's tasks were endless. With the bullock team he plowed and
cultivated the cornfield. By hand he hoed the beans and peas. He
milked the cow. He kept the rabbit hutch clean. He staked out the
she-goat by day and brought her in at night.

But these seemed mere child's tasks. He liked better to swing the
scythe in harvest time. Cutting down the sun-ripened hay was man's
work. He could feel his muscles hardening, his lungs swelling. He
took a fierce pride in piling the hay around a pole, piling it higher
and higher until it was ready for the thatched roof that became the
watershed.

If he tired toward the end of the day, he made himself remember the
mocking grin of the swineherd and the voice sneering, "You meddling
runt, you!" The memory gave him a new burst of strength. He gripped the
scythe like one possessed of a demon, and he cut the hay in great wide
swaths.

He felt better then, and to reward himself for the extra work he
went around to the barn, bridled Bianca, and rode pell-mell into the
gathering dusk. It was good to let the wind wash his face, to let the
smooth, rocking motion ease his body. He could ride for miles through
weeds and grasses without crossing a road, and he exulted in the
fearlessness with which Bianca faced the unknown.

Heading back to the stable one night, Giorgio let his bare legs dangle
along the mare's sides, and to his surprise he could not feel her ribs.

"Babbo!" he exclaimed when he brought her in. "Bianca is shaping up!
But please...."

The father interrupted. "I know, I know, and it is costing dear. Since
you grain her night and morning, I grain her extra at noon. A heaping
measure I give her, with sugar added."

Giorgio looked up in fear. "Please, Babbo, please don't sell her. I
pretend always she is mine. With her, the eyes are not needed. She's
_got_ eyes--in her ears, in her feet, in her heart. Babbo, don't sell
her."

There was a mark of pain between the father's eyes. "Son," he said,
"she goes sure-footed only with you. With the others she stumbles.
Her owner before us told me she breaks a man's leg in falling on him.
Giorgio, I got nothing to say. Families come first. Emilio and Teria
and Mamma got to eat."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two mornings later the blind mare's stall was empty. Giorgio felt
himself too old to cry. He found some of her tail hairs caught in the
wood of the manger, and very gently he pulled them out, as if they were
still a part of her. He braided them and put them as a keepsake in the
back of the big watch his grandfather had left him.

It was not until he arrived in Monticello that evening and his mother
said, "Giorgio, maybe somebody today hurt you?" that he wept. The room
was empty. Emilio and Teria had gone to their cousins' for supper and
the father was unhooking Pippa. Now, alone with his mother, the boy's
pent-up feelings burst.

She put her mending aside and with a quiet hand on his shoulder said,
"I think I know. It is Bianca who is gone this time. Your father, too,
is troubled. All night long he can't sleep."

Giorgio did not ask the fate of the blind mare. He knew. But in his
sorrow he clung to a frail thread of comfort. After his voice steadied
he asked, "When a creature goes to die, do you believe...." The words
came strained, begging for help, trying to find a way to ask it. "That
is, do you think a newborn comes to take the place of the other?"

The mother understood the boy's need. Slowly, thoughtfully, she said,
"This I have pondered also." Then a look of triumph lighted her
face, as if two things suddenly fitted together. "Si!" she said with
conviction, "when one leaves this life, another _must_ come into it.
Yesterday," she went on, "when I was washing our bed linen at the
public washbasins, a farmer from Magliano Toscano galloped by." She
drove her needle in and out of a button already sewn fast. "He was
followed by a veterinarian on a second beast. They were in a very great
hurry. You see," she added with a quick catch of her breath, "the
farmer's mare had been bred to the Arabian stallion, Sans Souci, and
she was due to foal. Her colt, of course, would be of royal blood!"

"Well, _did she_?"

The mother's hand made the sign of the cross. Then she looked happily
at Giorgio and her voice was full of assurance. "She did! The news
today carried all the way to our market-place. Her colt, Giorgio, is a
filly. And she has the eyes to see!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                               A Newborn


The daughter of Sans Souci was already foaled when the farmer and the
horse doctor arrived in Magliano Toscano. She was already dropped on
the bed of straw, and there she lay, flat and wet, like a rug left out
in the rain. Her eyes were closed and her nostrils not even fluttering.

The doctor, a sharp-eyed, determined little man, hastily pulled out
his stethoscope, and falling to his knees in the straw, held it to the
foal's side, listening. The farmer stood looking on, pale and helpless.
No less a person than Sans Souci's owner, the Prince of Lombardy,
wanted to buy the foal, but only if it were sound and sturdy. He had
even agreed to pay the horse doctor's fee. Would he, if she died? She
must not die!

"The heart?" the farmer whispered anxiously. "It beats? No?"

"Only faint," the doctor replied, "like butterfly wings." Straightening
up, he snapped out his orders. "You got to help. Lift her up! No! No!
Not like that. By her hind legs, hang her upside down. The blood, it's
_got_ to flow to the brain."

Frightened into submission, the farmer did as he was told while the
doctor began furiously rubbing the foal's sides. The perfect little
head was thrust back, mouth agape. The doctor stopped a moment,
placed his hands against her chest, but there were still no signs
of breathing. He pulled an old towel from his satchel, doused it in
the watering trough, and slapped the colt. "Wake up!" he cried. "Get
courage, little one! Breathe! Ahead lies the world!"

Still no response. The gray lump hung from the farmer's hands like a
carcass in a butcher shop.

"What we do now?" the farmer asked.

"Lay her down!" the doctor shouted, unwilling to give up. "Fetch the
wheelbarrow."

Puzzled, the farmer hurried out to the lean-to beside the barn.

The doctor crouched on his knees and with slow, forceful motions
pressed the tiny squeeze-box of the colt's ribs. "Breathe! Breathe!
Breathe!" he panted as he tried to pump air into her lungs.

The mare all this while had been lying exhausted. She lifted her head
now and let out a cry that was half squeal, half whinny. As if in
answer, there was a gasp from her foal. Then a shallow cough, followed
by a whimper.

When the farmer came rattling in with the wheelbarrow, he stopped in
awe. "She does not go under!" he exclaimed. Then he laughed in relief.
"The wheelbarrow--you don't need now?"

"Now I do!" Cheeks flushed in triumph, the doctor kept on pumping air
into the filly's lungs and at the same time barking out directions: "Be
quick! Fill a gunny sack with straw! Lay it flat on the wheelbarrow!"

The gasps were coming closer together. They were stronger. And stronger.

The doctor stopped pumping. He listened through his stethoscope and
heaved a deep sigh. "Is greatest thing I ever see! The mare, she helped
me just in time." Proudly, he lifted the newborn on top of the stuffed
gunny sack. "We take her now into your kitchen and dry her by your
fire."

"But why?" the farmer asked, more puzzled than before. "Why, when
already she breathes?"

"Please to remember this, my friend. For eleven months she is living in
a very warm place. Today is windly, and it blows cool into the barn."

Nodding, the farmer trundled the little creature past the stalls of
cows and bullocks and through the door that led into the kitchen.

"Maria!" he called to his wife as he lifted the foal from the
wheelbarrow and placed her beside the fire. "See what it is we bring!"

The farmer's wife, a plump, pleasant woman with eyes as shiny as
olives, came running from another room. Politely she greeted the
doctor, set out a bottle of her best wine and a glass on the table for
him. Then in an instant she was on her knees cooing, "Ah, poor little
one, poor dear one!" Without thinking, she had taken off her homespun
apron and was rubbing the filly as if its ribs were a washboard.

"_Brava! Brava!_" cried the doctor between sips of the golden wine.
"Your wife," he remarked to the farmer, "is a nurse most competent.
Guard well you do not burn the little one so close to the fire. Rub the
legs and the body until nice and dry. Then take her back to her dam."
He knelt down and put a finger in the filly's mouth. "See? Already she
sucks! By herself she will find the mare's milk faucets. And now I must
leave. _Arrivederci_, my good people."

The doctor's happy laughter rang out behind him as he walked across the
dooryard to the hitching post.

In the warm kitchen a second miracle was taking place. The foal,
yawning, looking about with her purple-brown eyes, was stretching her
forelegs, learning so soon that legs were for standing!

The farmer slowly shook his head as if now he saw her for the first
time, her frailty, her pipestem legs.

"Already I have a name for her," he said dully.

"So? How will you call her?"

"_Farfalla._ Butterfly."

"Is so beautiful," Maria sighed.

"Beauty, bah! Is not enough." In the farmer's eyes was a look almost
of hatred. "A _stout_ horse the Prince of Lombardy wanted. Nice strong
legs to race over the cobble streets of Siena. With a colt by Sans
Souci he hoped to win a Palio. Better that horse doctor never came!"

With a flirt of her tail, the foal tried a step, and fell down in a
fuzzy heap.

The farmer winced, almost as if he heard a leg snap and break. "Spindle
legs have no place in Palio," he snorted. "And for sure I cannot use
such a skinny beast in farm work. Better the hand of death had taken
her. Farfalla," he laughed bitterly. "She will live only the short and
useless life of the butterfly."

The Prince of Lombardy did not come to see the colt for several days.
He was a busy man--an art collector and a sportsman who raced his
horses not only in Italy but in France and Spain. His burning desire,
however, was to win a Palio. This, he knew, required a special kind of
horse, one not too finely wrought.

He knew too that the marshy land of the Maremma made an excellent
breeding ground, developing horses with strong, heavy bone. And so
he let the farmers of the Maremma bring their mares to his Arabian
stallion to be bred. Then if the mating brought forth a strong, rugged
colt, he would agree to buy it at weaning time.

When he finally arrived at Magliano Toscano late one afternoon, the
farmer broke into a nervous sweat. Maybe, he thought to himself, the
Prince will buy the little one, not for the Palio but for racing on
dirt tracks.

The mare and colt were out in a field at the time, wallowing in a sea
of grass. The farmer whistled them in, and as they approached, he
turned to the Prince. "Here comes Farfalla!" He trumpeted the words as
if they could make the filly as big as the shout. "She will lighten in
color, Signore, and become pure white, like Sans Souci. No?"

A quizzical expression crossed the Prince's face. He watched the foal
dance and curvet in front of him. His eyes went over her, inch by inch,
studying her legs, her hindquarters. After a seeming eternity, he
repeated her name. "Farfalla," he mused. "The name suits her well. She
appears capricious, nervous; not what I had hoped. She has none of the
bulk and brawn of the dam. But nonetheless I will pay the cost of the
veterinarian, and it is my hope you will find some use for her."

Waving his gauntlets in good-bye, he stepped into his open-top car and
roared off into the twilight.




                               CHAPTER V

                          The Flying Centaur


The filly grew--skittish and frivolous as her name. Every time the
farmer let her out of her stall she bolted past him, and snorting
like a steam engine, she flew down the aisle, sending goats and geese
scuttling out of her way. Then at the end stall she slowed just long
enough to sink her teeth into the buttocks of the black bullock. In the
split second before he could kick back, she was out in the sunlight,
squeaking a high hello to the world.

"It is a painful thing for the bullock," the farmer told his wife one
day. "But if he is not there, the rascal nips me in the pants instead."

The wife burst into a fit of laughter. She threw her apron over her
face to stifle her merriment.

"Bah!" the farmer stormed. "Women and fillies, they think alike! For
them biting is a funny joke." And he stomped out of the kitchen,
slamming the door behind him.

Away in Monticello, young Giorgio Terni inquired of travelers and
tradesmen about the daughter of Sans Souci. He learned only that she
was fiery and mischievous, unlike her work-horse mother. But he dreamed
often that she had taken the place of his blind mare. In his dreaming
she was an Arabian all the way--an Arabian whose ancestors had raced
swiftly across the sun-scorched desert. She would be steel-gray, of
course, with her muzzle nearly black, and her fine legs black from
knees and hocks to hoof, and her eyes enormous and dark. As for size,
he thought of her as big enough.

He longed to see her, but Magliano Toscano was many kilometers away,
and now was the season of the grape harvest.

Each morning before daybreak, the whole family piled into the donkey
cart and drove off to their vineyard. Up and down the rows they snipped
the purple bunches, dew-drenched in the morning, shiny warm in the
glare of noon. They filled basket after basket to roundness, and
emptied them into big tubs. It was Giorgio who lugged them, two at a
time, to the wine shed, dumping the grapes, stems and all, into a huge
vat. Then at dusk after the animals had been fed, he clambered up the
wall of the vat, grasped the pole across the open top, swung himself
inside, and with his bare feet pushed down the slippery seeds and skins
that had risen to the surface.

One evening when the family, dusty and weary, was returning home by
starlight, Giorgio spoke shyly to his mother. "Some day I would go to
Magliano to see the filly of Sans Souci ... if only I had the time."

"Maybe on Sunday after the mass," the mother suggested.

"I will go!" he cried, and the weariness of the long day suddenly
melted.

But Giorgio did not go. On the next Sunday he was chosen watchkeeper
of the church. And now the Sundays stretched out longer than all the
other days. He had to scrub the floor inside the church and sweep the
earth outside. He had to dust the altars. He had to arrange the benches
and chairs. He had to play the bells, calling the people from houses
and barns. He had to help serve mass. And when the services were over,
he remained on watch. Alone in the deep hush, he listened to the wind
moaning in the cypress trees, reminding him that each tree in the
churchyard stood for a soldier dead. He tried to close his ears to the
dismal sound, but the trees kept on whispering, and the mourning doves
added their plaintive lament.

There was reward, however, in being watchkeeper. It meant that the
people of Monticello considered him more man than boy. His voice was
changing, too, and now when he sang in the choir it cracked, sliding
far off key.

"Tsk, tsk!" the father remarked one Sunday. "Our Giorgio is getting a
voice most strange. More howl than human. Sometimes," he laughed, "I
look up quick to see, is he growing flap ears like basset hound, or
great furred ones, like Pippa? Because he knows how animals think, must
he sing like them, too?"

The family was seated around the table eating their Sunday supper of
_fritto misto_, a mixed fry of little fish from the River Orcia.

Emilio put down his fork in great seriousness. "Maybe some day my big
brother will be saint of the animals, like Saint Francis of Assisi," he
said proudly. "Then, Babbo, you will not laugh."

Giorgio's eyes glanced up from his plate and found the Palio horse
he had made, standing big-chested on a shelf. He saw that the
spennacchiera had fallen off, and he got up to press it back in place.

The mother watched him cross the room. "There are many ways," she said
softly, "for a boy to bring honor to Monticello."

Her eyes and Giorgio's met and held for a brief instant.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late in November when the farm work lessened and the fun began.
Hard by the village of Monticello were horse-rearing farms, and often
in the afternoons the older boys who helped in the barns challenged
Giorgio to a race. He was quick to accept each time, but he seldom
rode the same horse twice. "Never do I want to love one so much," he
explained to his father, "the way it was with Bianca, the blind one."

Always he rode bareback, no matter how rough the horse's gaits, and
always he used only his left hand on the reins. Some of the horses in
the Palio, he had heard, were no better bred than those his father
bought and sold. And if they had to be ridden bareback, with the right
hand free for the nerbo, he must practice now.

The other boys were older, taller, and they rode by gripping hard with
their legs. But Giorgio had to work for balance, leaning always with
his mount, thinking with him, flying together like one streamer in the
wind.

The boys soon recognized that Giorgio had a special way with horses.
Even the poor ones ran well when he was their fantino, and when he had
a good one, he was almost never defeated.

In time the races developed into hard-fought contests held on the
winding mountain road. Giorgio's heart sang a high tune as he flew
around the curves, his face lashed by his horse's mane. He was in
Siena! Riding in the Palio! _This_ curve was San Martino, _this_ the
Casato. The rippling of his horse's muscles against his thighs made him
feel like a man-horse, a centaur! He was no longer an earthling; he
flew.

With each race the make-believe intensified. The boys pretended they
were in the Palio, each riding for his contrada.

"I race for the Eagle!" one would shout.

"I race for the Panther!"

"I for the Wolf!"

"I for the Porcupine!"

It was fun at first, but for Giorgio the make-believe did not last. He
saw it for what it was, a pitiful imitation. None of the horses wore
spennacchiera in their headstalls. Nor did the fantinos fight with
oxhide nerbos. It was no battle at all!




                              CHAPTER VI

                         Giorgio Meets a Snail


As Giorgio rode to one victory after another, more and more people came
to watch. Word of his skill began to travel. It trickled like a wind
with a growing strength, first to the little towns on the fringe of the
Maremma, then to the foothills of Mount Amiata, and finally it sifted
through the mountain passes to the ancient walled city of Siena.

There, at the bottom of a steep, winding street known as Fontebranda,
lived a horseman belonging to the Contrada of the Snail. He was owner
of some rental properties, farms and homes, and he lived comfortably
on the rents they brought in. But what he really lived on was an
intangible thing, a pride in his daughter, Anna. For her he would
have plucked the moon and the stars. But since she shared his love of
horses, he settled for a fine stable. He kept four horses, sometimes
five, and he made sure they were burnished like copper, trained by the
most skilled, and ridden by men with sensitive hands.

His name was Signor Ramalli. He had never won a Palio, but he never
gave up trying. One day in the spring of the year he made an excursion
to the Maremma for the express purpose of seeking out a certain
horseboy. He did not leave Siena until after his noon meal, and he
stopped here and there in villages along the road to buy a bottle of
olive oil, a jug of wine, and a brisket of veal; so it was nearing
nightfall when he reached the hilltop village of Monticello. He
inquired of a cobbler the way to Giorgio's house. The man poked his
head into Signor Ramalli's automobile and with a breath rich in garlic
directed him up the steep, tortuous lane to a flight of steps flanked
by potted geraniums.

When the Signore found the house, there was scarce room enough to park
his car nearby, but he managed to wedge it in a crook of space made
by several lanes coming together. Then with a smile for the curious
children who gathered around, he walked up the worn steps and knocked
on the door.

Giorgio's small brother opened it. "_Buona sera_," he said politely. "I
am Emilio. And I have a sister Teria who bosses me, and a big brother
who is watchkeeper of the church." All in the same breath he added,
"Your vest is nice; it looks like our newborn calf."

"Newborn calf it is!" The man laughed in amusement.

Emilio's mother came hurrying out of the bedroom, tying a fresh apron
over her black dress. She saw at a glance that the stranger was a city
man from over the mountain.

"_Buona sera_," she said. "Please to excuse our little Emilio. He
chatters like the wren."

Signor Ramalli bowed and removed his hat. "You have an elder son,
Giorgio?" he asked.

"Si," the mother replied anxiously. "Has something happened to him?"

"No, no, Signora. Everything is most right."

"Then will you please to come in and have a coffee while you wait? At
this moment Giorgio should be in the barn, bedding our donkey. Soon he
comes."

"Thank you kindly, but I will go to find him; that is, if you will be
so good as to direct me."

The mother stepped out onto the porch. "You go only a little downhill,"
she said, "just beyond the public fountain. As you go, it is on your
right hand. My little Emilio here can take you, but he must hurry back."

Emilio, flushed with importance, took the stranger's hand and led him
the short distance to the stable. "Giorgio!" he called out. "Here is a
Signore who wants to see you!" Then reluctantly he turned and headed
for home, glancing back at every step.

Giorgio was leading Pippa out between the shafts of the cart. "You come
to see me?" he asked of the strange man.

Signor Ramalli stepped up and shook hands briskly. "Go on working,
Giorgio, while I talk. From the fragrant smells at your house I believe
a good bean soup is simmering, and I must not delay you."

Giorgio pulled the cart to the far end of the stable and tilted the
shafts against the wall. The donkey, freed, trotted to an empty manger
and in a raucous bray demanded her supper.

Signor Ramalli sized up the boy as he watched him pour out a measure
of grain. He could not help thinking how small Giorgio appeared in
the bigness of the barn, but he was not going to change his mind now.
The boy might be little, yet he was wiry, had good muscle, straight,
sturdy legs, and he worked quickly and with purpose. The man laughed
softly to himself; he was analyzing the boy as he would a horse!

"I am Ramalli of Siena," he explained. "I am a Snail."

Giorgio spun around. "You are _what_?" He took in the man's features,
and saw on his forehead a wen bigger than the bulb on a snail's
antenna. Is that why, he wondered, the man calls himself a snail?

"I belong to the Contrada of the Snail."

"Oh?" The word contrada sparked a lightning chain of thought direct to
the Palio.

"My main activity is horses and racing."

Giorgio stopped his work. He bowed to the man as if he were a king or
a cardinal. Then in his excitement he began scratching the donkey,
kneading down the dark stripe along her back. He took a breath,
listening.

"I have heard of your skill in racing, and...." Signor Ramalli paused
to let the full weight of his words take meaning. "I propose that you
ride for me."

The boy's heart seemed to stop altogether, then hammered wildly against
his chest. Speechless, he waited for more.

"Yes," the man was saying, "I propose that you ride for me in the
little races in the provinces."

Giorgio felt suddenly as if he had been dropped into a well.
"Wh-wh-where?" he stammered, hoping he had misunderstood.

"In the nearby small towns--in Asciano, in Montalcino, in Poggibonsi,
and others. You can continue to work on your father's farm, and come
away only on festival days. And you will not need to bother with
special racing costume."

Signor Ramalli came forward, and now he too began ruffling Pippa's
mane. "Does it not please you?" he asked.

Giorgio blushed, trying to hide his disappointment. In his mind he
could hear his father saying, "All in one day Rome was not built! Time
it takes to build a city; and time, too, to build a man."

Everything was quiet, except for Pippa's teeth grinding the grain to a
mealy mush.

At last Giorgio nodded soberly and replied in a voice he hardly knew as
his own. "_Grazie_, Signor Ramalli, I will ride for you."

Across the donkey's back man and boy shook hands.

"In Siena," Signor Ramalli smiled, "each contrada has 'protectors.' Do
you know what they are, my boy?" He waited for an answer, but when none
came he went on. "A protector is a person who believes in the people
of a certain contrada and does all he can to help them; he offers
friendship, advice, and money, too. It is a kind of kinship."

"I understand."

"It is my wish now to be protector to the little runt of Monticello!"
He smiled again, and the term from his lips took on a note of
affection. "In you," he said with a final warm handclasp, "I have great
faith."

That night in bed Giorgio lay awake a long time, thrashing out his
disappointment. To race in the little festivals was not what he had
hoped for; but perhaps--he tried to comfort himself--perhaps it was a
beginning.




                              CHAPTER VII

                        Bring Out the Satchel!


Giorgio's disappointment vanished with his first race. In the company
of a strong, willing horse how could he be anything but sublimely
happy? Compared to the lesser creatures he raced against, the entries
he rode for Signor Ramalli were always in top condition, sleek and fit.
And so, nearly always he won.

The entire family basked in Giorgio's good fortune. He brought home
trinkets and treats from hilltown and valley. From Asciano one evening
he burst into the kitchen with an armful of surprises for everyone--a
singing canary for Teria, three goldfish for Emilio, a brooch for his
mother, and a pouch of tobacco for his father; even a mouse toy for
Mom-cat and her kittens. For himself he had bought a shiny new flute
with extra stops.

Later that evening, with the younger children in bed and the supper
dishes done, the mother turned to Giorgio. "Now then," she spoke in
delighted anticipation, "stop playing your flute, close the light, and
come tell to Babbo and me how you won at Asciano. In the dark," she
added, "our mind goes to the place and we live better those moments
with you. Besides, it saves the electricity."

White moonlight flooded the room. It silhouetted the father,
comfortable on the couch, head leaning against the wall, pipe jutting
out in sharp profile. Now and then it belched a little shower of sparks.

"I did not win today," Giorgio announced.

If he had flung a stick of dynamite into the room, the effect could not
have been greater.

"No! Oh no!" the mother cried in dismay. "Where then came the money for
birds and brooches and fish? Where? Where!"

The father jerked bolt upright. His mouth fell open, and the pipe
clattered to the floor. "How can this be?" he demanded. "Explain
yourself, boy!"

Giorgio deliberately lifted his flute and tootled a string of giddy
notes to the faraway mountains. Then he laid it down. "_I_ did not
win," he said simply. "My horse won. I was passenger only."

"Bravo! Bravo!" The father laughed in relief. "Of you I am proud. Man
should not pump himself up when the victory is not his own."

From his first days of racing, Giorgio felt himself a man. He changed
from short pants to long. He had his hair cut oftener and kept it
slicked back to discourage the waviness. He walked more erect, trying
to make himself taller.

All summer long he was excused from farm work whenever a race was held
nearby. Signor Ramalli himself seldom attended, but when he did, he
was accompanied by little Anna. The two of them shouted and cheered
so lustily that it seemed to Giorgio his horse sailed in on the sound
waves of their voices.

Summer spent itself. The time of harvest came again to the Maremma.
And afterward the wind blew cold and the autumn rains sluiced down the
mountains, making rivers of the little streams. Giorgio and his father
no longer went to the farm, and for now, racing days were over and done
with.

To help out the family, Giorgio went to work for the town cobbler. It
was interesting at first to learn to use a lapstone and awl, and it was
fun to sew with a pig's whisker, driving it like a dagger in and out
of the leather. As he worked, he made believe that the tap-tap of the
cobbler's hammer was the tattoo of horses' hoofs.

In a few days, however, the newness wore off. Then the tiny shop became
a prison. It closed in on him, choking off his breath. The tap-tap
never varied from trot to gallop to walk. It was deadly monotonous,
always the same--tap-tap-tap-tap--until some days his head was fit to
burst. As the door and then the single window had to be closed against
the increasing cold, the pungent smells of turpentine and benzine and
neatsfoot oil were almost more than he could bear. All these, mixed
with the perspiration of feet and the garlic of the cobbler's breath,
made a stench that lingered in Giorgio's nostrils long after he reached
home.

As if this were not torment enough, he often made mistakes at his
bench--filing a heel unevenly so the wearer walked quite unbalanced
and raised a storm of protest; or hammering nails so they protruded
inside the sole and gave no end of discomfort. For these blunders, he
sometimes had to forfeit most of his meager pay.

But at last the winter days dragged to a close, and all at once spring
came in with a rush and a flood. Melting snows bubbled and boiled down
the mountainsides. Fruit trees exploded in white popcorn buds. Birds
gathered up more straws than their beaks could hold.

Giorgio felt like a bird, too, a bird suddenly released from its cage.
Once again he and his father were out in the fields. Each worked with a
zest to his own goal, the father to win the land, the boy to harden his
muscles, to increase his wind power. They ate with the same spirit and
gusto, opening the lunch bag as if it held the secret to more power and
strength.

"We stoke and stoke to make the hotter fire! Not so, Giorgio?" Babbo
asked every noon. And they laughed as their hands broke open the crisp
loaf of bread and their hard white teeth bit into it and then into a
chunk of wild boar sausage. Noisily they chewed them both together so
that the deliciousness of one brought out the deliciousness of the
other. Some days there was a good thick pea soup as a surprise. Then
they sang a rollicking blessing after instead of before their meal.

"We bellow out so deep from the soul," the father chuckled, "that God
in His heaven can hear without even pushing aside the clouds. Eh, son?"
And they both roared in laughter.

Afterward they lay down on the earth and snored like tired animals.

Plowing. Harrowing. Seeding. No task too big, none too small. And
always in the twilight hours Giorgio's feet unerringly took him around
to the horse barn. Some inner need urged him, drove him, compelled him
to gallop into the sunset as regularly as he ate or slept. Was it a
need to flaunt his freedom from earth and cobbler's shop? Or to give
the horses a taste of Paradise before they went to the butcher's block?
He did not know. He knew only that at day's end when he was sweaty,
dirt-creased, and limp, he found joy in thundering across the swales as
if in the next moment he and his horse could float over the mountain
and into the sky.

The seasons wore on. The festivals came again, and again Giorgio rode
for Signor Ramalli. The Umbrella Man came and went, and with his coming
the Palio dream intensified, yet remained always the same--always
beautiful, always on the other side of the mountain, always out of
reach. Winter closed in and the days in the cobbler's shop piled up
endlessly, one on top of another, and all were alike.

One day in the following spring, Giorgio felt as if his life had come
to a standstill. He seemed to be marking time, doing the same things
over and over and over again, working each summer in the fields, riding
each fall in little unimportant races, sweating out each winter in the
cobbler's shop. He was like a turnspit dog, running in a treadmill
cage, smelling the roast but never tasting it.

In this mood of despair he arrived home to find the family in a high
state of excitement. They met him at the door, all speaking at once.

"A letter! A letter! A letter!"

"For you comes a letter!"

"It says: 'Sig. Terni Giorgio.'"

"Open it, quick!"

Everyone waited on Giorgio as if he were king. Emilio hung up his lunch
bag after fingering inside for the crumbs. Teria brought him a cup of
hot coffee.

The mother handed him one of her long hairpins. "Here, Giorgio, with
this you have a fine letter opener."

The father entered unnoticed. "Is it no more the habit in this house to
greet the father come home from work?"

Hurriedly the children showered him with hugs, then ran back to Giorgio.

"Let _me_ open it!" shouted Emilio.

"No," Signora Terni said firmly. "It is Giorgio's."

Giorgio stood very still. He took the letter and the hairpin with
trembling hands. The blood throbbed in his head. He had once received
flute music sent from Rome, but that was in a thin roll with his name
printed by machine. This was a real letter, handwritten in black ink.

"Don't stab too deep," the mother warned. "You might cut also the paper
inside."

Cautiously, as if a Jack-in-the-box might pop out, Giorgio slit the
envelope. He unfolded the fine white paper and silently read the few
lines. His face paled, then flushed.

"What is it?" asked the mother in alarm.

"What does it say?" cried Teria.

"The news, is it good?" asked Babbo.

"Is it bad?" shouted Emilio.

If Mount Amiata had suddenly risen from its base and marched across
the valley, Giorgio could not have been more amazed. "It's from Signor
Ramalli! Never before has he written me!"

"Read it out," cried Teria.

Giorgio cleared his throat and read slowly:

    "Siena, 16 March, 1952

    "Dear Giorgio:

    "If your Babbo can spare you from the fields, I desire you to come
    at once to Siena. I have now four extraordinary horses and would
    wish you to be their trainer. The Palio of July, as you know, is on
    the second. We must hurry.

                                             "Expecting you soon, I am,

                                                           "V. Ramalli"

Grown as he was, Giorgio grasped Emilio by one fat hand and swung him
around and around until the pots and pans on the wall went flying. Then
he swooped up the letter and held it on high as if it were the Palio
banner itself.

"Mammina!" he cried. "Everybody! Everybody! Bring out the satchel. I go
to Siena."




                             CHAPTER VIII

                           Over the Mountain


Babbo rose to his feet. In the darkening room his eyes gleamed in
pride. "I have goose flesh! I cannot believe it could be! Today a
letter is come. Tomorrow our Giorgio goes over the mountain. To please
Signor Ramalli," he declared, "he must arrive in Siena tomorrow."

Plans were quickly made. It was decided that in his new importance
Giorgio should not walk the long way to Casalino to catch the autobus
that would carry him to the train at Sant' Angelo, and thence to Siena.
Instead, the entire family would drive him in the donkey cart directly
to Sant' Angelo, where they could all bid him good-bye at the railway
station.

It happened just so. Even Pippa took part, giving out a steamwhistle
bray that nearly drowned the conductor's cry of "Ready!"

As the train pulled away, Giorgio leaned far out the window, waving
his satchel. Wistfully, he watched Mamma and Babbo, Teria and Emilio
climb into the donkey cart, and his eyes held them there together until
nothing was left, nothing but a tiny blur against the yellow of the
station. Then that, too, was gone.

Hands still clutching his satchel, he kept right on standing in the
aisle, staring out at the fast-moving landscape. And all at once the
hollow pain in his stomach left him, and he faced the bigness of his
adventure. It was as though the rushing wind and the chugging engine
were taking possession of him, lifting him out of himself, over the
mountain, and into a new world.

The cone of Mount Amiata loomed ahead with clouds toppling along its
ridges, and streams spilling whitely down its face and into the river
below. Still at the open window, he could feel the train laboring on
its long climb from the valley of the Orcia to the folded hills. He
saw with surprise that it was not just one valley, but a succession of
countless hills and vales. Like an earthworm the train wriggled through
them, and up through a wilderness of boulders broken only by tufts of
broom and brush.

He saw the kilns of charcoal burners, and a goat girl knitting as she
watched her flock, and he saw stunted sheep scrabbling upward toward
the mountain pastures. He was glad he was not a sheep, nibbling his
slow way to the top. And he was gladder still when the desert of rock
gave way to dark forests of chestnut trees, and then to beech, and then
to scrub pine. The little hills were ridges now, and as fast as the
train could make the turns it pushed on up steeper and steeper ascents
until it reached the summit, the bleak bare summit where the sharp wind
held a bitterness that made his eyes weep.

"Boy!" The voice of an old woman startled him. "Close that window, if
you please. My old bones shudder with the cold. Besides, your face
grows red and smudged."

Giorgio quickly closed the window, wiped his face on his new
handkerchief, and found a seat. He placed his satchel between his legs
and tirelessly scanned the horizon as the train began to roll down
out of the high country. Every frowning castle in the distance, every
bold fortress, every hamlet he mistook for the city of his dream. But
when at last he caught his first glimpse, he knew it for Siena, yet
was unprepared for its splendor. In the clearness of early evening the
jewel-like city rose up on the shoulders of three hills, its slender
towers jutting into the sky. They were like none he had ever seen. One
was shining white with stripings of black, like a zebra; the others
were pink and carmine, or was this rosy color a trick of the setting
sun?

His heart raced. He felt her ancientness at once. Here were
battlemented walls, and pinnacled domes, and steeples piled high and
higher--all jumbled, yet ordered.

Siena! Siena!

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the hour of early evening when the train pulled into the
station. Giorgio was first to jump out. He hurried through the groups
of waiting people, impatient to find Signor Ramalli. Searching faces,
hoping to see one he dared ask directions, he threaded the network of
narrow streets. The people seemed different to him, like figures in a
painting. He wondered if they might even speak a different language!

Slight-built as he was, he kept clumsily bumping into the passers-by.
Each time he tried to work up his courage to ask, but no one took
notice of him. It was like walking in sleep until a deep-timbered voice
broke into it.

"Young lad! Come here!" The voice belonged to the
Chief-of-the-Town-Guards. He was an enormous man, handsome in a dark
blue uniform with gold epaulets. "Young lad, you will find better the
walking if you move with, not against, the promenaders. Now," he asked
solicitously, "can I help you?"

Giorgio felt a surge of relief. They spoke the same language! "Signor
Ramalli," he burst out, "his house I must find. If you please!"

The Chief-of-the-Guards looked down from his great height. "To find
Signor Ramalli's house," he said, "you have only to follow your nose."

"My nose?"

"Yes," he laughed, "your nose. You go down and down the Via
Fontebranda, and when your nose is stinging with the stench of animal
hides in brine, then you are there. Almost." He held onto Giorgio with
one white-gloved hand while with the other he stopped an autobus to let
by a team of scrawny horses drawing a load of wood.

"Feed the bony beasts," he cried to the portly driver, "instead of
yourself!"

Then he turned again to Giorgio. "Now, young man, after the smell from
the slaughterhouse you will run into a new smell of lye and bleach from
the public laundry. Then turn in at the next doorway, and there you
are!"

Giorgio hesitated. "But _my_ Signor Ramalli must have a stable."

"Yes, yes, I know," the Chief replied in friendly annoyance. "It is as
I said. Through the bad smells you must go until you come to the nice
fragrance of horses and hay. You see, lad, the house of the Ramallis is
at the end of the street, with magnificent vista of the valley beyond."

No directions were ever given more clearly. Down, down the Via
Fontebranda Giorgio hurried half-running, not to get past the cow hides
in brine, but because the descent was almost perpendicular.

Just as the Chief had said, the last door belonged to the Ramallis. The
family of three welcomed him as if he were a son come home. They were
in the dining room, and at once the mother and daughter arose to set an
extra place.

Signor Ramalli hooked his thumbs into his calf vest and smiled at
Giorgio. "After we eat, we give you choice of two rooms for your
sleeping quarters. One is in our home, and the other is the empty
storeroom over the stable where you can hear the slightest whinny in
the night. That room, though barer, is bigger and...."

"I would rather prefer the storeroom," Giorgio interrupted, "where I
can be closer to my horses."

It was, in fact, a tremendous room. It faced the east where the
first rays of the sun came slanting in, touching off the strings of
purple onions and garlic, and peppers, shiny red. Besides these gay
decorations there was a wide and comfortable brass bed, a trestle table
and chair, and an ancient sea chest that had been emptied for Giorgio's
clothes.

Comfortable as his room was, it was only a place to sleep. Sixteen
hours of the day he lived with his horses. There were three mares and
a gelding depending on him for all the creature comforts of food and
water, and new shoes, and warm blankets at night, and small friendly
talk.

But more, Signor Ramalli was depending on him to bring them all into
bloom for the July Palio. This was high challenge. Here he was, still a
boy in his teens, barely shoulder-high to his pupils; yet he was master
of their destiny! Ambra needed schooling in being mounted; a race could
be lost before it began. Lubiana was stubborn, always wanting her own
way. Dorina was awkward at maneuvering; she could lose the Palio at the
hairpin turns.

Imperiale, however, posed the most interesting problem. He was a
big-going fellow, part Arabian, sired by the famous Sans Souci. What he
needed was soothing words to quiet his nervous habit of biting on the
wood of his stall. He reminded Giorgio of a frightened child chewing
his fingernails.

Each day Signor Ramalli grew more pleased with Giorgio. The boy was
two persons in one--skilled trainer in the morning; stableboy in the
afternoon. He attacked the cleaning of the stalls, the oiling of the
bridle leathers, the currying and grooming with the same chin-thrust of
determination as he did the fine art of teaching.

And so, nothing was good enough for him. Morning and night, he ate at
table with the family, but this, instead of making him feel jolly,
stirred up the beginnings of homesickness. There was something about
Anna that reminded him not of his sister, Teria, but of Emilio--a kind
of puckish eagerness, wanting to know about the horses, wanting to
help, wanting to ride.

It was after supper, after darkness, that doubt and anguish and the
sharp pangs of homesickness set in in earnest. His dream of the Palio
seemed as far away as ever. "I am only an outsider," he thought as he
sat alone and forlorn on the sea chest. "I belong to no contrada, for I
am not born Sienese. There are seventeen contradas, yet no one of them
has asked me to ride. I have four horses, but I have none." He smiled
a crooked smile, recalling how he had longed to be in Siena, but now
that he was here something had gone wrong with the dream.

In humiliation and despair, his homesickness washed over him like
a wave, and he could see the Maremma where earth and sea and sky
come together, and the earth's humps that form Mount Amiata. And in
all that wild sweep the only man-made thing was the cross on the
mountain. In his loneness he closed his eyes, and there were the warm,
smoke-wreathed rooms at home, and in the smoke he saw the whole family,
clustered about a sausage hanging from the kitchen ceiling. Each in
turn was rubbing a slice of bread against it for flavor because the
meat itself had to be saved for supper. Yet in the poverty there was a
closeness and understanding he now missed. For moments he seemed unable
to breathe; it was the same tight, suffocating feeling he had known in
the cobbler's shop.

The only help was to run, run, run! Night after night this need took
possession of him. Like a colt spooked by an imaginary devil he bolted
out of his room, raced up through the canyon walls of Fontebranda,
across the busy Via di Città, down a flight of steps, and out onto the
vast and beautiful Piazza del Campo. Here he could look up above the
circle of turreted palaces and see a wide patch of sky and the same old
dipper that winked down on Monticello, and all at once he felt less
alone. Gulping and panting, he could squeeze the heaviness out of his
lungs, could breathe in cool fresh air.

Night after night he had to escape, always to the deep stillness of the
Piazza. It became his habit to stand first before the dazzling Fonte
Gaia, admiring the frieze of white marble statues in their white marble
niches, and the marble wolves spewing water into the marble pool. Then
he would face about and look across the broad shell of the amphitheater
to the Palazzo Pubblico, where the city officials worked, and his eyes
went up and up its soaring tower until he imagined he saw a bell ringer
away up there, no bigger than a spider.

He tried not to torture himself by studying the race course around the
empty shell, or wondering which contrada might some day choose him as
their fantino. Instead, his mind went back to the years before the
Palio, when men battled bulls in the square. If he half-closed his
eyes, he could array himself in coat of mail and he could see the blade
of his spear flashing silver in the moonlight as he thrust it into the
flesh of a charging bull. Then heavy with weariness, as if he had slain
a score of bulls, he trudged back to his room and slept.

But in sleep he could not wear the blinders. His dreams were always of
the Palio.

As the first month wore itself out, Signor Ramalli sensed a growing
restlessness in the boy. One day he recognized it openly.

"Tomorrow," he said to Giorgio, "is a Sunday. A quick journey to
Monticello is the best cure I know for ailments like homesickness. In
a day you will come back feeling more content here. Now then, in the
morning when I get out my car to take my wife and Anna to the early
mass, I will at the same time take you to the station. My wife will
prepare for you a little lunch to carry, and I will buy you a ticket,
both ways."

He held out his hand. Giorgio put his small calloused one inside the
great warmth of the Signore's and felt it close around his with a clasp
so strong it made him blink. Giorgio's heart leaped in joy.




                              CHAPTER IX

                      The Cart Horse of Casalino


The Sunday train inched its way along toward the Maremma. Instead
of _Accelerato_ it should be called the tortoise, Giorgio thought.
He paced up and down the aisle. He leaned out the window, waving
at peasants working in the fields even on a Sunday. He ate his
lunch--thick slices of ham with white bread, and an orange. He took off
his jacket and shadowboxed with a fat little boy.

At Sant' Angelo he changed to an autobus and finally, toward noon,
arrived at the crossroads of Casalino.

It was one of those freakish days in late spring when the air seems to
belong to July. The sun brassy hot, the wind at a standstill. No one
was anywhere in sight except a carter, a big loutish fellow with an ear
trumpet hanging on a string around his neck.

"Hey, boy," the man called out. "For two hundred lire I carry you ...
wherever."

Giorgio felt of the two hundred lire in his pocket. Did the man
sitting in that rickety old cart have X-ray eyes to make up for his bad
ears?

"No, no, thank you," Giorgio replied. "Only a few kilometers I must
walk." He started to explain where he was going, and perhaps if the
driver seemed friendly he might even confide that the two hundred lire
had been saved for a special sugar bowl in a special cupboard in a
special house in Monticello. But he stopped short as his eye fell upon
the mare hitched to the cart. She had something of the look of his
Imperiale, only finer-boned and more Arab. She was a gray, flecked with
brown, but too thin by far and her coat dry and harsh.

He wondered if it was the way she jibbed her head and nervously pawed
the earth, or just the general look of her that put him in mind of
Imperiale. Or was it the wide-set eyes, so dark and smoldering?

"Excuse," he said, stepping up close to the man and mouthing his words
slowly, "but the mare--is she by Sans Souci?"

"Eh?" The driver adjusted his ear trumpet, cocking his head in
puzzlement. "Eh?"

"I say, is she by Sans Souci?"

"Si, si. She for sale."

"I don't want to buy her. I only ask...."

"Nobody want to buy her. She spring like cat, kick like kangaroo, chip
wood like woodpecker." He started to goad her with the whip; then,
as her ears laced back, he changed his mind. He turned to the boy
abruptly. "Who are you?" he asked.

"I am Giorgio Terni."

The slit mouth widened in a grin. "O--o--oh, you're Tullio Terni's boy,
the little runt of Monticello. For you I cut my price; for one hundred
lire I carry you to door of house."

Giorgio smiled his thanks and turned away. He set off down the road,
twice looking over his shoulder at the fine Arab head with the small
ears pricked against the sky. He thought he heard a nervous whinny, but
it might have been the breeze in the poplars.

He strode to Monticello as if there were springs inside him. Along the
way people welcomed him, called him by name. "Hi, Giorgio, how is it
being a city fellow?"

But the real welcome came within the encompassing walls of home. To his
family he was already a hero. They fluttered about him, taking off his
jacket, pouring him coffee, peppering him with questions.

"How do they treat you? Do you get nice white bread with your meals,
and is the spaghetti cooked done? Do you get used to those noisy
streets?" This was Mamma talking.

"Do you like Anna more than me?" This was Teria.

"Did you bring me something? A calf vest, maybe? Is the bump still on
Signor Ramalli's forehead?" This was Emilio.

And at long last, from Babbo, the question Giorgio wanted first: "How
do you get along with the training of the horses? Tell us all about."

"We--ll--ll," Giorgio answered importantly, "I have four horses
in my stable. I get along pretty well. Of course, there are some
difficulties. First I have Ambra. She is fine, but has strong dislike
for bridling. Then I have Lubiana, who is fine too, but sometimes
stubborn like mule. And Dorina, she is awkward in changing gaits."

He saved the best until last. "And I have Imperiale. He is Arab, and
he flies!" He turned his chair to face his father. "Now it is I who
ask. Babbo! I saw today at Casalino a mare, gray and lightly specked
with brown. She is poor and thin, and she pulls a miserable cart with
traces and harness held together by rope. But she looks to be one of
San Souci's get."

"She is!" exclaimed the father.

Giorgio's heart was a hammer. He could hardly wait to tell Signor
Ramalli that now he was a real horseman. His questions came fast.

"How old is she?

"From where does she come?

"Why is she not racing instead of pulling the cart?

"Has she colts?"

The father scraped his chair away from the table. He reached for the
stool in front of the cupboard and propped his stockinged feet on
it. He loosened his belt and gave a happy grunt. It was good to have
man-talk in the house again!

"That poor mare," he began, folding his hands across his stomach, "is
sold for convenience from one to the other. She has the nervous tic,
so that forever she is biting--on wood, on anything. And her throat...."

"I know, Babbo. It makes the throat swell."

The father nodded, proud of his son's knowledge. "Men beat her,
thinking it will stop the biting, but it only gets worse. Now she is
good just for carting things from here to there."

Teria interrupted to place before Giorgio a slice of ham and an onion,
and the mother brought out a whole loaf of white bread, newly baked and
still warm.

"Do you want the crust, Giorgio, or just a thin slice?"

"The crust as always, Mamma, if you please."

"Emilio!" commanded the father. "Your brother cannot eat without a good
glass of wine."

Fearful of missing a word, Emilio flew to the grotto of a cellar behind
the front steps and returned breathless with a dusty old flask.

Giorgio was busy scooping out a little hollow in the crust with the
point of his knife.

"What you doing, Giorgio?" asked the father. "You not eating the ham?"

"No, thank you," he said, noticing how little was left. "I am just
hungry to taste again our onions cut up in the crust with vinegar and
salt, and maybe some capers, if we have...."

The capers appeared as if by magic from Teria's hand.

Between bites, Giorgio interrupted the silence which surrounded him.
"But why," he asked of Babbo, "do they sell that mare from one to the
other? Is it the nervous tic?"

The father pursed his lips, thinking.

"That can be controlled," Giorgio added quickly. "The great Sans Souci
had it, and my Imperiale has it, too. Is it only because of that?"

"No." The father paused.

"What, then?"

"Well, you can't believe it, but ill luck trails her like smoke from
fire. Already she has four colts of no account."

"Four!"

The father nodded. "The first time she got twins, but they died before
lifting their heads above the straw."

"And then?"

"Next time her colt is crippled in foaling and has to be put down."

Giorgio stopped eating and sat silent. After a moment he said, "And the
fourth colt? Dead, too?"

"No. Not him. He will make big stout plow horse when he is grown. He is
no more like Farfalla than bull is like deer."

The mother, who had been listening all this while, now plucked at
Giorgio's sleeve. "Farfalla is the one...." she whispered softly. "She
is the one born in Magliano Toscano on the day Bianca...."

Giorgio felt the hairs on his skin prickle. So this Arab mare, fastened
with ropes to the traces of a shabby cart, was Bianca's successor! He
nodded and smiled wistfully in remembrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning Giorgio was back at work in Siena, happier and more
content there. And for the first time he felt encouraged that Dorina
and Imperiale might be ready for the July Palio. As he schooled the
well-bred gelding, teaching him to make smaller and ever smaller turns,
his mind flew back to the cart horse of Casalino. Clear as a vignette
he saw her jibbing her head against the sky.

"It would be a miracle from God," he thought to himself, "to harness
that wildness, to calm the frightened soul."




                               CHAPTER X

                          A Buyer of Ox Skins


It was on the day Giorgio returned to Siena that Farfalla was sold
again. A buyer of ox skins, Signor Busisi by name, was making one of
his regular trips to the Maremma. He was a big-framed, bushy-browed man
with a shock of white hair. As he drove along in his shiny new Fiat,
he was sorting skins in his mind--all sizes, all qualities. He was not
even thinking about horses. And he was trying very hard not to notice
his nagging indigestion.

Signor Busisi was from Siena, and therefore he was first of all a
strong contrada man with a passion for the Palio. Besides, he was a
canny judge of horseflesh. In years past his horses had won no less
than five Palio banners, a record few owners could match! And when he
had no entry for the Palio, he sat as a judge of the trials, helping
to choose the ten horses that would run, out of the twenty or more
presented. His fellow judges held him in great respect, often waiting
for him to nod the decisive "yes" or "no."

Of course, being an honest man and a realistic one, Signor Busisi
admitted to himself that over the years he had purchased some weedy
horses with faults too numerous and embarrassing to think about. And
so he did not think about them. Besides, he was getting on in years,
trying to ignore the pains around his heart and the frequent attacks
of indigestion. "I've got a lot of age on me," he told himself. "No
time for regrets; for me the spring flowers will bloom only a few times
more. Better it is to look _ahead_." And so in the years remaining he
was determined to live each day as if it were the last to shine upon
him.

On this morning of April the Maremma country was the color of clear
emeralds, the birds singing, and nothing between earth and sky except,
coming over the hill ahead, a tall, airy-striding cart horse.

The Signore slowed down and pulled off to the edge of the road. He
got out and unbuckled his belt a notch. The pangs of indigestion were
sharpening. Perhaps walking around a bit, exchanging the time of day
with a country carter, might ease the pain.

Before he greeted the man, he unconsciously took stock of the mare. To
himself he said, "She must be well over sixteen hands high. Good legs
and feet. Fine bone beneath the rough coat. Barrel too thin, head and
throttle excellent. Eyes dominant."

The carter meanwhile was sizing up the automobile and the owner. "Is
new--the car. Is old--the man. And rich. I wonder, will he permit that
I haul goods for him from here to there?"

"_Buon giorno_," Signor Busisi said in a loud voice, noticing the ear
trumpet.

The carter bowed until his chin touched his grease-stained shirt.

"Your mare," the Signore began, "how is she called?"

"Si, si. She for sale."

"Not so quick, my good man," the Signore bellowed. "I only ask how you
call her."

The carter was unabashed. He grinned, showing yellow, horselike teeth.
"She has the name Farfalla. She is daughter from Maremma mare and Sans
Souci."

"Incredible!" the Signore exclaimed. "That accounts for the quality
look."

"Eh?" the driver asked, holding up his trumpet.

"Incredible!"

The grin widened. "How long you stay in Maremma?"

"Today only."

The carter scratched his nose thoughtfully. Money jingling in his
pocket and wine on the table would be better than a no-good mare.
"Signore," he said in a nasal, wheedling voice, "you like buy my mare?"

Signor Busisi made no answer. At close range he saw that she was no
longer young. "What age has she?" he asked.

"Eh?"

"How many years has she?"

"Oh, she very young. She has only four years," the man boasted, smiling
at his deception.

Signor Busisi ignored the answer. There was that certain something
about her--perhaps it was the arch of the neck and the high-flowing
tail, perhaps it was the enormousness of the eyes. But somehow, in
spite of her rough coat and her shoes too big and the ramshackle cart,
in spite of everything, she had dignity and nobility. The Signore felt
that the carter and he, himself, suffered by comparison.

All at once his indigestion was gone! Excitement caught hold of him. He
did not want another horse for his own; he felt himself too old. But he
was not too old to place her, to give her a chance. She could be good,
even great. "Who knows without the trial?" he asked himself.

Sensing a quick sale, the carter was like a tiger cat sniffing its
prey. And agile as the cat he leaped from the cart--eyes greedy, hands
ready. He held out the reins.

"Not yet! Not yet!" Signor Busisi protested. "I make only the offer."

"And I only look at her shoes," the carter lied. "A stone maybe is
caught. I take best care of Farfalla. Always I stop to clean out her
feet."

"I am certain you do."

"What you say you give me?"

"I did not say. But I do now. I will give sixty thousand lire."

The carter sneered. "Six thousand lire!" he shouted angrily. "More
money I could get for one old, deaf, mangy donkey with red blotches
and no hair." He spat on the ground with as much venom as if he had hit
the man with his spittle.

Signor Busisi remained unruffled, waiting for a noisy motorcycle to go
by. "I said _sixty_ thousand lire," he repeated, more loudly this time.

The change in the carter was electric. He bowed low, kissing the
Signore's hand.

Quick as a flash the mare took advantage of her owner's bent position.
She drew back her lips, and with her big teeth pinched hard through the
seat of his trousers.

"Ee-ee-ee-ow!" he screeched, trying in vain to break the viselike grip.
It was only by the intervention of the laughing Signor Busisi that she
let go.

Rubbing his bruised flesh, the carter promptly agreed that for the sum
of sixty thousand lire he would deliver the mare to Siena in a day or
two.

Signor Busisi suddenly felt young and strong again. Trying to suppress
his laughter, he jackknifed his big frame into his car, swung into the
road and roared on to Casalino, thinking, planning, dreaming. Somehow
he would do it again--bring the right man and the right horse together.
It was a never-failing source of wonderment to him how it came about.
That black gelding he had sold to a man of the clergy, and the trick
sorrel to a clown in the circus....

His thoughts broke off. He was nearing the warehouse where the ox skins
would be already dried and dressed, awaiting his selection. He must put
the mare out of his mind; and he did. For the time being.




                              CHAPTER XI

                      The Ghost in the Warehouse


Eager to make the sale, the carter of Casalino delivered the mare to
Siena within the week. And while he went to a restaurant and ordered
himself a heaping plate of veal scallopini in anticipation of the sixty
thousand lire, Signor Busisi went to the bank to draw out the money.

On his way up the few stairs to the grilled portal, the Signore found
himself side by side with a slight young man. He turned to see who it
might be, and his face lighted. "Doctor Celli!" he exclaimed in pleased
recognition. He hooked his arm through the young man's, swung him
around, and led him back down the steps to the courtyard.

"Doctor Celli!" he beamed, unable to conceal his delight. "Think of my
bumping into Fate twice in one week! May I delay you a moment? No?"

The gray eyes in the sun-browned face smiled. "Naturally, Signor
Busisi. For you, my work can always wait."

"I had not thought to find you so soon."

"To find me?"

"Yes, you. This life is a big puzzle, Celli, jumbled with odd-shaped
pieces. Then _presto_, the pieces, they fit!"

"Am I one of the odd pieces?" the doctor laughed.

"Let us say you were."

"And the other?"

"The other piece is...." the Signore ran his fingers through his shaggy
white hair. Then he straightened to his full height and spoke in
staccato excitement. "The other piece is an Arabian mare. She is called
by the name Farfalla, and she moves as easily as an oiled machine. I
found her in the Maremma. Quite by happenstance." The words now came
more slowly. "Doctor Celli, you are the one to prescribe for her. She
has the nervous tic."

The young man burst into fresh laughter. "Do you forget, Signore, I am
a doctor of accounting, not of medicine?"

"I know, I know; but a doctor of this or that is smart enough to work
magic in other fields. Besides, you are a horseman. You have a villa
and hunting reserves, and as I recall, there is on your farm a good
road, long and straight, fit for gallops. And," he paused a moment in
his eagerness, "in less than three months, the Palio!"

The two men in the courtyard stood facing a statue, very tall, of
Bandini, a celebrated economist, but neither one saw it. Nor were they
conscious of the people going in and out of the bank. They were both
seeing the same vision: Piazza del Campo in battle array--flags flying,
lances gleaming, knights and nobles marching, horses dancing at the
ropes, fantinos tense and ready. In their veins all of the ancient
feelings boiled up again.

For a long moment the silence seemed unbreakable. Then at last Signor
Busisi exploded. "You, Celli! You belong to the Contrada of the
Unicorn. No?"

"Si, si."

"Your contrada is small and has won few Palios. No?"

Again the young man agreed.

"How sad for you, but...." the Signore waved his arms to heaven, "think
how sweet your frenzy if a horse owned by you should win, even for
another contrada!"

"A thousand times I thank you, Signor Busisi, but I never buy the cat
in the bag."

"But, Celli! You do not have to buy the cat in the bag. This Farfalla
by Sans Souci is here, right here in Siena! You have only to look!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Respecting Signor Busisi as he did, Doctor Celli went early the next
morning to see Farfalla. She was stabled temporarily in an old, dank
warehouse used for storing ox hides. As he left the sunlight and
crossed the doorsill, he stood blinking among the flies and the smells
of dried blood and brine. A chill went through him. Out of the shadowy
darkness the figure of the mare loomed like a gray ghost. Suddenly she
scented the stranger and reared into the air, as if she would pitch him
heels over head if he tried to mount. Then she retreated into a corner,
her ears laid flat, her nostrils snorting, her lips drawn back.

It was several moments before Doctor Celli's eyes became accustomed
to the dark. Then he took note of the fresh teeth marks on the wooden
crib. "This cribbing is a thing she will not outgrow," he warned
himself. "Yet nervous horses are like nervous people; they work in
bursts of energy. For a race, this is good."

Back and forth he argued with himself. "She is too old to buy! Already
she looks to be a six- or seven-year-old!"

And he answered himself. "But some horses come late to their full
glory." He remembered the mighty Lipizzans of Vienna whose training
did not begin until they were six. Perhaps she, too, would be a late
bloomer. And if she was daughter to the noble Sans Souci, and if Signor
Busisi liked her, that was enough.

He heard a cough behind him, and turned to find the Signore standing
silently in the doorway.

"Restive, she is," the Signore said, "and pitifully underfed. But the
Arabian blood is unmistakable; no?"

Already Doctor Celli had taken the hurdles in his mind. "Signor
Busisi," he said, "from the fresh teeth marks it is plain that she is a
nervous cribber. You already have told me this. Yet in spite of it, her
possibilities intrigue me."

"Ah," the Signore replied, a wistful note in his voice, "is it not
something beautiful to offer her the chance of fulfillment in this
life?"

Within the span of the next ten minutes the walls of the warehouse
echoed with excited voices. The haggling over the price began in a
series of crescendos--up down, up down, up down.

The louder the talk, the quieter Farfalla became. The hub-bub seemed to
be the very balm she needed, and Signor Busisi was quick to point it
out. "Notice, Celli," he laughed, "the mare is now tranquil."

At last the two men were shaking hands to seal their agreement, both
looking tremendously pleased.

The Signore took a deep breath, feeling his tired old heart skip a
beat. "The pieces of the puzzle, they fit nice and precise," he sighed.
"For sheer happiness my heart is bursting." And he smiled, as if he had
given to the mare and the man their destiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

As smoke lifts in an uprising wind, so ill fortune lifted for Farfalla.
She began a new life. From the dingy, malodorous warehouse she was
suddenly living on a wind-brushed hilltop beyond the city walls. It was
from gloom to Paradise!

She had a nice box stall with sparrows for company, and outside her
door she could hear pigs rooting and geese making friendly clacking
noises. From her stable a grass-grown lane wound down and leveled off,
straight as a string. The stretch of straightness began at a small
bridge and flowed quietly through woods and farmland.

Each day was like the one before, and they were all good. Mornings
when the mist lay wet and shining upon the land, she was saddled and
bridled, and away she trotted without the nuisance of a cart joggling
along behind. No rumbly noises at all. And no collar across her
shoulders, nor leathers holding her back. Only a light hand on the
reins and the light weight of Doctor Celli in the saddle. Occasionally
a span of oxen would loom into sight and plod by, but to Farfalla they
were placid old friends, remembered from the Maremma.

In this pleasant way the days and weeks of training for the Palio
slipped by, one like the other. But along toward the end of June, with
the selection of the horses only three days away, Doctor Celli was
sent on a business errand to Rome. Scarcely had he left Siena when the
sky clouded and the rain began. It pelted down in big drops, far apart
at first, then closer and closer until they formed a thick curtain.
Hour on hour the rain drummed ceaselessly against the small window of
Farfalla's stable, until the noise and the eerie darkness threw her
into a terror. She jerked her head up and down, more desperate with
each moment, and she clamped her teeth on the uprights of her stall,
biting them, peeling slivers of wood, and at the same time sucking in
great mouthfuls of air.

Night and morning, the tenant farmer sloshed through the rain to look
in on her. He saw to it that she had fresh water and grain and sweet
meadow hay. But he cut his visits short, for she reared and snorted at
the shadows made by his lantern, and her ghost-white color made his own
flesh creep. He noticed her appetite was poor, but he attributed it to
the foul weather and the lack of exercise. What he failed to notice was
the swelling of her throat, and her belly becoming hard and distended.

When Doctor Celli returned, on the evening of the second day, he
hurried at once to the stable. It was the very eve before the selection
of the horses, and he wanted to be sure that Farfalla was as fit and
happy as he had left her. With his hat dripping and his raincoat
glossy wet, he entered her stall. To his horror he found her rolling
from side to side, pawing the air in an agony of pain. He called in
a veterinarian at once, but with all the aids of stomach pump and
quieting medicines she still could not be readied in time for the
trials.




                              CHAPTER XII

                               Rejected


On his way to the trials the next morning Giorgio Terni heard the
news, but it carried no weight with him. He was riding Dorina to the
Piazza del Campo to present her before the august body of judges.
As he drew rein at a busy corner, he saw the tall figure of the
Chief-of-the-Guards and heard his deep voice ring out:

"_Attenzione!_ Make way for the horse!"

Motorcycles, cars, pedestrians, all came to a sudden halt. As the boy
guided Dorina across the street, the Chief walked alongside. "Giorgio!"
he said confidingly, "Ramalli's horses now have greater chance for
being chosen."

"Why, Signore?"

"Because Doctor Celli's mare is withdrawn."

"So?"

The Chief nodded. "She suffers severe with the colic. Now only fourteen
horses remain in the trials."

Giorgio felt honored that the Chief had stopped traffic for him and had
called him by name. But the news was in no way startling, for who was
Doctor Celli and how could an unknown mare affect his chances?

When the judges accepted Dorina and Imperiale, too, in the trial races,
Giorgio felt an inward satisfaction, yet he was not surprised. He
had known all along they would be chosen. They were ready. They were
sound. They were, as the judges agreed, "neither too fine-boned for the
cobblestone track, nor too clumsy for the perils of the course."

But when Dorina was assigned to the Contrada of the Panther and
Imperiale to the Giraffe, it came as a shock that neither one hired him
as fantino.

"Did I not train these horses? Do I not know their ways? Why," he
implored Signor Ramalli, "why did they not choose _me_?"

Out of kindness the man gave no real answer at all. He only shrugged
and said, "Man's ways are strange, Giorgio, very strange." And to
lessen the blow, he added, "Perhaps, months ago they hired their
fantinos."

Little Anna, however, told the truth. On the morning of the Palio she
came into the stable while Giorgio was solemnly mucking out the two
empty stalls. "Poor unhappy Dorina and Imperiale," she said. "They must
be homesick in the strange stables of their contradas. And maybe they
will bolt when the new fantinos leap on their backs."

Giorgio flushed. Even this small girl felt pity for him, and took this
way of showing it. He turned his back on her, but every fiber of him
was listening.

She prattled on. "I think it most foolish of the Panthers and the
Giraffes to choose riders from far away."

Giorgio wondered. Did she know the real reason? "Why did they?" he
blurted.

Anna stood twisting her braids, almost afraid to say. "You promise not
to tell Babbo if I tell you?"

"I promise," he quickly agreed.

"Well, then," she began importantly, "to our house came some visitors.
You see, it is sad, and Babbo already is sad. So you must not sadden
him more. You promise?"

"Twice now I promise."

"Well, one man says to Babbo, 'Giorgio is too young for Palio battle,'
and the other says, 'Giorgio is not only young, he is puny. And his
hands....'" Anna caught her lips between her teeth and hesitated.

"Go on! Go on!"

"They say, 'His hands are ... _girl's_ hands. They cannot whack with
the nerbo and hold the reins too.'"

Blood climbed hot in Giorgio's cheeks. "Girl's hands!" Was that it?
He would show the Giraffe! He would show the Panther! He would show
all the contradas! Because his hands were small, did this make them
weak? Because he had less beard than other fantinos, did this make him
green in the handling of horses? No! A thousand times no! Some boys are
old before their time. "I was born old," he thought. He could never
remember when he had not worked, nor when in the sweat of his work he
had not dreamed of doing great things, of proving himself big for his
size.

The day that was to have been all shining glory turned to ashes. In
dull numbness Giorgio lived out the Palio of July second. As the sound
of shields rattling and drums beating and battle cries came to him,
he bridled Lubiana and rode far outside the city walls. She was not
good enough for the Palio; neither was he. He rode for hours. He could
almost have reached Monticello, but purposely he went the opposite way.
How could he face the unasked questions of Mamma and Babbo? How could
he face Emilio wearing a spennacchiera in his thatch of hair, daring
his little friends to knock it off?

It was long past dark when he returned to the city. From within the
walls he heard music coming toward him. The Wolves were chanting their
victory song, loud in celebration.

Unable to bear the haunting sadness, he led Lubiana through the narrow
side streets to her stable. Then, exhausted, he tip-toed to his room
and fell across the bed. He lay there staring into the darkness, the
din of the drums beating through his tired brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

From that day on, Giorgio worked his string of horses with renewed
dedication. It was the only way to hide his hurt. Men and children
came in twos and threes to watch, then in knots of ten or more. He was
hardly aware of them. He did not look to see if they were peasants or
landowners, strangers or Sienese.

One early morning when he was working Imperiale, a new exercise boy
came to Giorgio's favorite road to school his mare. He was really not
a boy at all, but a small-headed, long-bodied weasel of a man, and he
rode a tight rein.

Giorgio made a quick appraisal of the mare, and something within him
snapped. His heart seemed to stop in its beating, then began to race
wildly. The creature was an Arabian, her mantle a gleaming gray,
flecked with brown. And her head was delicately shaped, with the muzzle
small, and the eyes enormous and wide-set. There was no mistaking the
eyes. He did not even need to think. She was, she had to be--Farfalla!

Unconsciously he slowed the pace of his mount. He thought: "She is
like a piece of sculpture. Some day I will make a statue of her. And I
will give it to our museum at school and there she will stand among my
childish works."

All this he thought before he deigned to look at the groom who had
bitted Farfalla too tightly. Should he tell the clumsy fellow you
handle an Arabian differently from all others? That you ride with
almost a slack rein? And the whip, does he not know it only makes
creatures like her more nervous, sometimes even vicious? Where has she
been since that Sunday morning at Casalino? Who owns her now? Is he
kind or cruel?

Giorgio rode Imperiale alongside Farfalla, changing his pace to match
hers. Then he rattled off his questions. Each one was met with glum and
stolid silence.

At last the man nosed the air. "I got no time to talk to a boy with the
slough of the Maremma all over him!" And he dragged out the word "boy"
to put Giorgio in his place, and also to get rid of him. Then, digging
his spurs into the mare's sides, he made a rude sign with his thumb,
and galloped off.

Day after day the two schooled their mounts along the same road. Always
the wizened groom kept his distance. It was almost as if he might be
tainted by associating with someone from the Maremma. There were other
roads about Siena, equally good, but the man and the boy seemed drawn
to this one by some urge beyond their control, some sinister force
egging them on to match their mounts and their wits.

One day the schooling gave way to a fist fight.

"Boy, go find yourself another road!" the man commanded.

And Giorgio leaned forward. "Why should _I_ go?"

"Because you're a milksop; too sissy to fight!"

This was the spark that touched it off. Giorgio leaped from his mount,
tied him to a sapling, caught the man's foot, swung him off Farfalla,
and began punching with both fists.

The wiry groom ducked the blows, tossed Giorgio into the dirt, and
would have trampled him mercilessly had not Farfalla taken this moment
to fly past, her heels narrowly scraping the man's head. It was all the
advantage Giorgio needed. He caught the groom off guard, sprang to his
feet, and grasping the man's arms, he pinned them tight to his sides.
The groom lowered his head, butting it against Giorgio's, and at the
same time twisted his shoulders, trying to wrench free. But Giorgio
held fast, his arms locked tight around the lean body.

"Look!" the groom cried in mock alarm. "Farfalla escapes!"

Giorgio turned. The two animals were quietly eating the leaves of
the sapling. After one well-planted blow, he freed the man in great
disgust. "Get on your horse!" he cried, and watched the bowed legs
scuttle off to mount Farfalla.

In this way the suspenseful days of July passed and the August Palio
drew near. A week before, Imperiale developed a swelling on his
left foreleg, had to be blistered, and was withdrawn from the race.
But Dorina again passed the trials, and this time was assigned to
the Contrada of the Porcupine. And again, no one from any contrada
approached Giorgio to say, "Giorgio Terni, we earnestly desire you to
be our fantino." And he could not use the reply he had rehearsed awake
and asleep: "Signore, I am honored deeply to ride in the Palio for your
contrada."

When the day of August the sixteenth came and the bell in the Mangia
Tower began tolling, Giorgio forgot he was man-grown. With all his
clothes on, even his high-laced country boots, he went to bed like
a child and pulled the covers up over his head. But still he could
hear the bell, sonorous and deep; could see the pageant unfold in his
mind, telling the beads of history. The solemn tolling went on and on.
And when he could stand the reverberations no longer, they suddenly
stopped. The dead quiet that followed was even harder to bear. It meant
the race was on! Giorgio saw it in all its wild and glorious beauty,
heard the onlookers cheering, then roaring loud and louder until the
noise filled his room. Drenched in sweat, he burrowed deeper into the
covers. He wished he could suffocate and die. Unless he could be part
of the Palio, he would rather be dead.

At last exhaustion took over and he fell into a jerking sleep. It was
Signora Ramalli and Anna who wakened him, turning on the electric bulb.
He flew out of bed, embarrassed to play the role of a sulky child.

"Giorgio," the Signora spoke in a mothering voice, "we come with the
special things you like--macaroni and coffee for strength, and a good
mocha torte to sweeten your bitterness." She set the tray on his table
and pulled out his chair. Then she and Anna sat down on the chest to
watch him eat.

Giorgio smiled his thanks. He picked up his fork and tried the
macaroni, but it stuck in his throat. He tried the frosting of the
torte, and to his relief it melted on his tongue.

"Better you were not there," Anna said. "Our Dorina was nearly last.
Niduzza won for the Goose. But I thought a white mare, Farfalla, had
won, so close were their heads."

Giorgio's spirits lifted. The cart horse of Casalino had nearly won!

"Babbo says the reason Dorina failed is not because there is weakness
in her."

"Nor in her training," Signor Ramalli added, coming into the room. He
sat on the edge of Giorgio's bed and sighed heavily. "By now you must
know, son, that the agreements of the contradas beforehand play a vital
role."

Giorgio put down his fork, listening.

"It will be enough for me to say that even the most unseasoned horse
could win. Take any of the losers. Take Farfalla. In today's battle
she may have been deliberately held back at the last moment. You must
know," he repeated with all the force he could summon, "that sometimes
there are secret arrangements between the captains of the contradas.
The fantino is given orders. He _has_ to lose, even when his heart
cries out to win. There is no choice."




                             CHAPTER XIII

                          The Goddess Fortuna


Time in Siena is reckoned by the Palio. Trips, even important ones, are
postponed until after a Palio, or made hurriedly before. In the family
Bible, births and deaths are often recorded by it; this person was born
on the eve of the Palio of July, 1939; that one died during the August
Palio of 1880.

Giorgio, too, began counting time by the Palio. In between, he felt
himself in a vacuum. There seemed no real stuff and substance to
living. He remembered an incident when he was a small boy. He was
watching a veterinarian standing over a sick horse, and the man had
said, "This beast I do not pronounce dead; it exists in a state of
suspended animation." Then with a long needle the doctor injected
medicine into the horse's heart, and it began to breathe, and to live
again. The Palio was a stimulant, just like that. Even the hopes dashed
and the despair were easier to endure than the dull ticking of time
between.

Signor Ramalli kept Giorgio on for the winter, but often on Sundays
he was allowed to go to Monticello. At home one evening, with the cat
purring on his shoulder and Emilio and Teria looking on, he started
work on his statue of Farfalla. It was strange how he remembered
everything about her, even to the length of her mane and tail. As he
worked, he found himself putting a shapeless lump on her back. He
pinched and pressed, adding clay here, taking it off there, until the
lump began to take form.

"What!" Emilio exclaimed, his eyes round in curiosity. "What are you
making there! A fantino? Is it you?"

Studying it, the mother said, "Why tear out your heart in an aching for
the Palio? Some of us are meant to dress the table for the others to
eat. They are blessed, too."

Giorgio managed a smile, but the longing for the Palio persisted.
In the slow months that followed, he sometimes wished he had never
listened to the Umbrella Man. But deep inside he knew he did not mean
it; he was glad he had the next Palio to think of. The next one would
be different. He would be in it, and the horse he rode would be an
Arabian, almost white. And all the rest of his life the Palios would
come, year after year, one wild race for glory after another.

The next Palio was different indeed. The contest really began on the
road where the weasely groom and Giorgio waged their continual warfare.
Grimy and sweating, Giorgio was trying one day to teach a mare to lead
with either her right foreleg or her left when going into a canter.
Unless she could take a curve on the correct lead, her legs might cross
and she could fall, endangering herself and everyone on the course.

Farfalla, with her groom sitting smug and superior, was executing a
series of perfect half-turns down the center of the road. Every time
their paths crossed, the man sniped at Giorgio with a sharp insult.
"Hey, you! To teach a donkey, is necessary the teacher is less donkey
than the donkey. Ha! Ha!"

Giorgio usually ignored the quips and jibes, but this one cut deep
because it was overheard by two important-looking men beckoning him
to the side of the road. One, a dignified man with balding head,
introduced himself as Signor de Santi, an attorney, and captain of the
Contrada Nicchio, the Shell.

The other, towering and magnificent in his blue uniform, was Giorgio's
friend, the Chief-of-the-Guards. In an easy, knowing way the Chief took
hold of the mare's bridle and looked up at the boy's dirt-streaked
face. He smiled as if he had heard the taunt but ignored it. "Giorgio!"
he exclaimed, "we come with a message for you."

He turned to the Captain, who now cleared his throat as if he were
about to address a jury. "We of the Shell," he intoned, "have sought a
fantino raised in our own contrada, but," he cleared his throat again,
"such a one cannot be found. Here am I, therefore, wandering over the
countryside, seeking."

Giorgio was struck dumb by the importance of the two men, and
embarrassed by his own appearance. Hastily, he wiped his face on his
sleeve and with his fingers combed his hair.

The Captain boomed on. "Seeing you with your stained shirt and
disordered hair makes me think of the words of Angelo Mentoni, who
said, 'In order to make a fantino for the Palio, three requisites are
needed--age, liver, and misery.' Age you have not; of your liver I know
not; but misery you have--in a manner only too evident!"

Giorgio blushed, then began to shake all over in anticipation. Trees
went spinning before his eyes, the sky tilted, and the men's faces swam
before him as if they were under water. He knew that out of respect he
should dismount, but in his dizzy excitement he might fall sprawling at
their feet.

"I am of the opinion," the Captain continued, "that you are a boy
of good future and will fight earnestly to win. Unfortunately, we
are not a contrada of great wealth. However, in the event of victory
you will be rewarded in proportion to our limited means." He coughed
apologetically. "You must realize, boy, that on our part this is a
dangerous risk. Your ... ah ... smallness, while an advantage when
riding in the provincial races, is no advantage at all on a cobblestone
course where riders sit bareback."

Giorgio wanted to shout: "Capitano! Chief-of-the-Guards! I will take
the risk. I will ride for no pay at all! I will pay you if I can! I
will save my fare to Monticello!" Then suddenly came the remembrance of
home--of the sausage hanging from the ceiling and the pieces of bread
rubbed against it for flavor, and he gulped. He tried to say, "Signor
de Santi, I am honored deeply to ride in the Palio for your contrada,"
but the words stuck in his throat.

The Captain took the silence for consent. "Good!" he said, "you shall
be the fantino of the Shell for the Palio of July the second. You
shall present yourself at my study on the morning when the horses are
assigned." He reached up, grasping Giorgio's hand, wringing it until it
hurt. Then the Chief did the same, and their eyes met in the complete
understanding of one horseman for another.

For the first time in his life Giorgio galloped all the way back. He
brought his mount in blowing and lathered, a thing he had never done
before. Quickly he sloshed water over her. He scraped off the excess.
He put a blanket on her. He walked her cool. Then he tried to walk
himself cool, up and down the Via Fontebranda, but his feet barely
touched the cobblestones. He could not walk; he paced, he ran, he
galloped. He felt like some god of long ago, like Mercury skimming the
clouds.

That evening when Signor Ramalli heard Giorgio's news, his face lighted
in pleasure. "If this honor had come to my own flesh and blood," he
said, "I could not be more glad. It is honor indeed that the Captain
comes to you so long before the assignment of the horses. He must
consider you able to handle any mount."

Later, in the stillness of night, Giorgio wrote to his father and
mother. "Mamma and Babbo," he carefully formed the letters, "to you I
will dedicate my first Palio. And to Farfalla."

Not for one instant did he doubt that Farfalla would be chosen to run.
Nor that in the drawing when the horses are assigned to the various
contradas, the Contrada of Nicchio, the Shell, would win her. "It _has_
to be," he told himself.

A month later, at the trials, Giorgio watched without breathing as
Farfalla nearly took a spill at the starting rope but caught stride
and finished fourth. In Giorgio's mind his arch enemy, the groom who
rode her, was entirely to blame for the bad start. But even so, she was
among the ten chosen.

Giorgio sighed in relief. This, he felt, was the first step toward his
goal, and certain proof that he would ride her in the Palio. Was she
not Bianca's successor? Were not their life threads destined to come
together?

After the trials the very air of the Piazza seemed charged with
intolerable suspense. The drawing was at hand. The hour was
ten-thirty, the sun striking hot on the cobblestones. Still rankling
over the clumsiness of Farfalla's groom, Giorgio joined the throng
gathering in front of the Palazzo Pubblico.

Everything was beginning to happen. Ten _barbarescos_ or official
grooms, in the brilliant costumes of their contradas, were taking
their places before a raised platform. Ten trumpeters were mounting
the steps, lining up at the front edge, ready to blow on their silver
trumpets. The Mayor and the captains were seating themselves at a long
table.

The stage was set. Two tall urns were already placed far apart on the
table. Within their opaque beauty they held the fate of the drawing--in
one the names of the contradas, in the other the numbers of the horses.
And against the Palace wall two racks were hung, where everyone could
plainly see them; they were empty, waiting for the matched names and
numbers.

Seemingly the whole town was on hand, each person tense, each praying
that his contrada would draw the best horse. Already the ten were
rated ... this one for speed, that one for endurance. Giorgio listened
to what people were saying.

"Ah, Belfiore is a veteran of many Palios. She knows those sharp curves
like the corners of her stall!"

"Oh, ho! Do not overlook Ravi, the little black gelding."

"If Bruco, the Caterpillar, does not draw a good horse," said a man
with a cracked voice, "I will go to the country."

"Then go!" The jeers were ribald. "In thirty years your Bruco does not
win the Palio."

"Si, si," taunted a gleeful young voice. "Bruco wears the grandmother's
cap." And everyone took up the singing cry: "Bruco wears the
grandmother's cap! Bruco wears the grandmother's cap!"

It was stilled only by the trumpeters blasting forth on their silver
horns. Then a hushed silence as two small pages stepped forward to the
center of the stage. In military precision they turned smartly on their
heels. One marched to the urn at the right end of the table, and the
other to the urn at the left. While everyone watched, breathless, they
took from each urn a wooden capsule and with a deep bow presented it to
the Mayor.

The Mayor's hands shook violently as he opened the first capsule,
unrolled a white slip of paper, and held it high for the crowd to see.

"Number six!" Every voice roared as one voice.

Quick as a wink, a man scrambled up a ladder and slid a number 6 into
the top space of one rack.

Giorgio glanced into the corral nearby, where the mare Belfiore wore a
number 6 beneath her ear.

The crowd went wild. "Give us Belfiore!" they cried. "Give us Belfiore!"

Then silence clamped down as the Mayor opened the second capsule and
held up the paper. Those nearby read it, and almost before their
lips formed the name, the man on the ladder slid the board marked
"Porcupine" into the rack beside number six.

The Porcupines were beside themselves with joy. "Already we have won!"
they shouted.

Giorgio felt a tightening of his chest. He began to know fear. Why had
he been so sure the Nicchio would draw Farfalla? With each capsule
opened, fresh beads of sweat rolled down his back. He could feel his
shirt cling damply to him. He listened to the pairing in an agony of
suspense.

"Ravi to the Caterpillar."

"Mitzi to the Goose."

"Saró non saró to the Tower."

"Anita to the Panther."

"Goia to the Snail."

"Lirio to the Wave."

"Tarantella to the Turtle."

"Fontegiusta to the Unicorn."

Only two contradas left; only two horses left! And now the last spaces
in the racks filling in, irrevocably:

"Farfalla to the Forest."

"Turbolento to Nicchio, the Shell."

Giorgio was too stunned to move. In minutes, the Goddess Fortuna had
knocked down his hopes as if they were toy blocks. He watched the
members of the Forest lead Farfalla away to their stable. And he let
the people of the Shell push him along with them to surround the dark
bay, Turbolento. He was glad for the jostling crowd, and the deafening
noise--the happy shrieks, and the wails of the disappointed ones. He
wanted to wail, too, but Captain de Santi had turned to him, his face
alight with joy. Above the din he introduced four strapping young men.

"Your bodyguard," he shouted. "They will protect you from harm, and us
from interference. Wherever you go, from one dawn to the next, they
will be with you."

There was a look so desolate on the boy's face that the Captain gripped
his shoulder. "Have you nothing to say? Nothing at all? Are you not
happy?"

Numb, drenched in misery, Giorgio heard his long-rehearsed speech come
out at last: "Capitano, I am honored deeply to ride for your contrada."




                              CHAPTER XIV

                      At the Curve of San Martino


In spite of his disappointment, Giorgio's spirits began to rise with
each passing hour. Even if he could not ride Farfalla in the Palio, he
was no longer an outcast. He was a participant! And for a week at least
he would be free of the weasel of a groom with his sly grin and razor
tongue.

That same day of the drawing, and for three successive days, the
rehearsal races were held. They were called _Provas_, but Giorgio
failed to see that they proved anything.

In the first one he was eager to make a good showing for the Shell,
and he lifted Turbolento up over the starting rope before it actually
touched the track. In fact, he was well in the lead when he noticed
that none of the other fantinos were urging their mounts. They made a
great to-do with flapping elbows and wild yelling, but anyone could see
they were intent on concealing their mounts' true ability.

Giorgio followed their cue. Besides, after the first spurt, he sensed
that he might have trouble with Turbolento. Although not new to racing,
the horse was accustomed to the tracks in the provinces. The races
there were run counterclockwise, while here in the Piazza del Campo the
running went clockwise. It would take patient control of Turbolento's
speed and of his leads to prevent his switching at the turns. Before
Giorgio had gone once around the Piazza, he understood the real purpose
of the Prova. Horses and riders had to get acquainted three ways--with
each other, with the dangerous slopes and curves, and with the opposite
way of running. No wonder the rehearsal races were neither battle nor
competition!

During the days of the Provas, Giorgio felt as if he had the all-seeing
eyes of a horse. Besides watching Turbolento's every move, he managed
to see what was happening to Farfalla, whether she was ahead of him or
behind. Her fantino, Ivan-the-Terrible, went around the curves flapping
his wings like a bird. Twice he flew off into space. Luckily, Farfalla
was not hurt by entangling reins or bumps from other horses. Giorgio
remembered later that he had noticed Ivan was unhurt only after he had
made sure about Farfalla!

"Which horse is it you ride?" an elderly man of the Forest whispered
to Giorgio after the third Prova. "Is it your Turbolento, or is it our
Farfalla?" And he winked and nudged him in the ribs as if he wished the
boy could be their fantino.

Quickly Giorgio's bodyguards closed in, wondering if the man were
making some secret offer. But they might have saved themselves the
trouble, for neither Turbolento nor Giorgio was considered strong
enough to win--or to help anyone else to win.

Despite his watchfulness, Giorgio failed to see the crippling accident
that happened to Farfalla in the last Prova on the very morning of the
Palio. Between the curves of San Martino and the Casato, the horses of
the Panther and the Unicorn were having a private race of their own.
As Farfalla tried to pass, a hoof lashed out and hit her a sharp blow,
almost severing the cartilage of her left hind foot. Ivan-the-Terrible
managed to stay on, and let her finish the race limping heavily.

Moments later Giorgio passed her in a narrow lane as she was being led
back to her stable. He turned to look at her bleeding heel. "The devil
pursues her!" he said to his guards. Then his eyes blazed with a sudden
thought. "They won't race her; they _can't_ race her this afternoon in
the Palio!" he cried out.

"But they got to!" the young men answered in chorus, and they turned on
him in a torrent of explanation.

"It is a law from year seventeen hundred," the Number One guard said.
"If an animal is lamed or dies in a Prova, it is not permitted to
replace him."

Another guard broke in excitedly. "Why, I myself saw one killed in a
Prova, and the contrada remained horseless."

"I too saw it!" the first one said. "And in the parade before the race
the long black tail and the severed hoof of the dead one were carried
on a platter of silver."

Now thoroughly roused, the guards were irrepressible. "And the flags of
that contrada were tightly furled in mourning and even the strongest
men wept like small children and cried aloud."

Giorgio felt his stomach turn over. Almost pleading, he looked from
face to face. "But Farfalla is crippled! There could be a stumble, a
fatal...."

"Then it will be her time to die," the Number One bodyguard said
flatly. "She too is only mortal." There was no coldness in his voice.
He was merely repeating words said to him long ago.

Giorgio tried to shut out thoughts of Farfalla. He made his mind go
forward. He began counting. Three hours until the blessing of the
horses in the churches of their contradas. Then the long historical
parade, and at last, at sundown, the Palio!

He went with Turbolento into the stable of the Shell and watched the
barbaresco go to work, sponging him off, making him comfortable and
cool with especial attention to his head, eyes, and nostrils. Giorgio
stood by as long as he could. Then from sheer habit he fell to his
knees and hand-rubbed Turbolento's legs. Unconsciously he worked for a
long time on the left hind, as if in some remote way he were helping
Farfalla.

Giorgio usually had the mind of a camera. Events registered sharply
with him. But that afternoon, during the long parade in which he wore
the martial costume of the Middle Ages and rode a heavy warhorse, he
felt himself an actor in a play, an actor who did not know his part. He
was bewildered by the vast sea of faces in the center of the Piazza,
and the kaleidoscope of color in costumes and flags, and the drums
beating out a somber rhythm. Through it all he rode woodenly, like a
toy soldier.

But with the explosion of the bomb announcing the race, he became all
awareness again. With every fiber he heard the starter call out the
horses in order.

"Number one, Caterpillar!"

"Number two, Shell!"

"Number three, Forest!" That was Farfalla. Ignoring her injury, she
walked briskly to the starting rope. Giorgio reminded himself that of
course the doctors had deadened her pain.

As the horses moved to their positions, Giorgio felt his breath coming
fast. Turbolento and Farfalla were side by side. "Is it some omen," he
asked himself, "that brings us together?"

The starter's voice blared on: "Number four, Tower.... Number five,
Snail.... Number six, Wave.... Number seven, Panther.... Number eight,
Goose.... Number nine, Turtle!"

Now nine horses in line--pawing, dancing, heads pulling to go. And nine
fantinos with faces taut, reins taut, waiting for the number ten horse.
Not until he is called to the rope can the race begin.

"Number ten, Unicorn!" the strident voice of the starter fills the
Piazza.

Head lowered like a bull charging, the number ten horse gallops up,
almost touches the rope. The starter springs it. It snakes free. Ten
horses, as one, leap over it!

Giorgio's fingers tighten hard around the nerbo. If he takes the lead,
he will not need it. He arrows Turbolento out in front, sets the pace.

Forty thousand throats cry "_Forza! Forza!_" as the bunched leaders
pass the Fonte Gaia, pass the Casino of the Nobles, pass the scaffold
where the judges sit. Now they are thundering toward the death curve of
San Martino.

Behind him Giorgio hears the nerbos strike hollow against horseflesh
and sharp against steel helmets, but he is still in the lead, free of
the bludgeoning.

Out of the tail of his eye he sees the Wave, the Goose, the Panther
fighting it out, and behind them Ivan-the-Terrible trying to drive
Farfalla through. In the split second of his looking, a fantino
catapults into the air like a rag doll shot from a cannon. It must be
Ivan! It _is_ Ivan! Farfalla is staggering on by herself. All this
Giorgio senses rather than sees. He is at the curve now. Turbolento is
leaning at a crazy angle; he seems to be tiring, faltering.

From every balcony and window, from all over the Piazza, the people of
the Shell are shouting to Giorgio: "The nerbo! The nerbo! Use the nerbo
on him!"

Giorgio feels icy terror. Turbolento is trying to wheel, to run the
wrong way of the track. His left foreleg crosses his right. It is
rooted! The pack is passing him! From both sides nerbos are raining
blows on him, on Giorgio, beating them out of the way.

Giorgio lifts the horse's head, tries to get the weight on his hocks,
but it is too late! Turbolento freezes, then buckles. His scream joins
the shrieks of the crowd as he somersaults and slides across the track.
Giorgio is pitched into the air, and hits with a thud on his back.

Hoofs go thundering past while he lies writhing, gasping, the wind
knocked out of his body. As in a trance he sees the white-coated
veterinarian rush out on the track. He hears the crack of the bullet
that ends Turbolento's life, and sees the limping form of Farfalla come
within an arm's length of the smoking pistol.

His heart beats thickly. He is suddenly afraid. A soundless prayer
escapes his lips.

"Not her, too! O Holy Mother, not her! Not her!"




                              CHAPTER XV

                         The Odd Pieces Again


He was still gulping for air, but he had to move before the horses came
around again. He felt a pair of strong hands grasping his upper arms,
helping to lift him.

Feeling less hurt than humiliated, he pulled away. It was not his
body that needed help. He made his knees bend one at a time, and he
pushed himself up. And he got to his feet under his own power and as
the horses whirled past, he went tottering alongside, clinging to the
upright mattresses that lined the curve.

With his sleeve he wiped the sweat and a streak of blood from his face
and he sucked air enough to walk head up. But the pain of remembered
sounds and sights bore down on him--the sharp crack of the bullet,
the instantaneous thud, the dribble of crimson, the crazed scream cut
short. Then the whole world was a spinning blackness. What had happened
afterward?

All about him a solid pack of humanity was streaming onto the track.
The race was over! Voices came at him like cross winds, some shouting
"Bravo!" and some crying in strange foreign tongues. He was sucked
along with the crowd, stumbling, shuffling, pulled into their meshes
like a fish into a net. Over and above the shouting came wild,
deafening cheers, beating out the syllables:

"_Tar-tu-ca!_"

"_Tar-tu-ca!_"

And so he knew that the Contrada of the Turtle had won. And he yelled,
too, but he did not know what he yelled. He had to yell to keep from
fainting, to keep from crying.

Two of his bodyguards got through the crowd to him, linked their arms
in his, supporting him, buoying him along, questioning in his ear.

"How do you feel?"

"You all right?"

His head nodded "yes" but all of him felt numbed, disgraced. And his
legs trembled as if at any moment they might splay and split apart.
Through the shouting and joyful singing, he could hear remembered
voices mocking:

"Hey, you runt of Monticello!"

"You, with the slough of the Maremma all over you!"

"Girl's hands ... girl's hands ... girl's hands...."

The words jumbled in his dizziness, and he staggered along, feeling
himself littler and weaker than ever, like some fragile moth battering
its wings against the walls of the centuries. He knew now what the
Umbrella Man meant. The Palio was indestructible. Men could beat their
fists against it. Horses and fantinos could die for it, but it would
remain forever the supreme challenge.

He wanted to be alone in his agony. His guards understood, and let
him go. As he went zigzagging through the crowd, he pressed his palms
hard against his ears, trying to shut out the singing, and the drums
beating, and the inner voices accusing. At last he stood panting before
the door of Turbolento's stable.

He rang the bell, summoning the barbaresco. He knocked. No one came.

A couple walked by, arm in arm, unmindful of him. He might have been a
cat scratching to be let in. He tried the latch. The door was open! He
lurched into the dark emptiness. The barbaresco was not there. No one
was on guard. No one was needed. He closed the door behind him, and
his shaking hands locked it. The light from a street candle came in
the high barred window, threw a splash of yellow on the strawed bed of
Turbolento. It was freshly made, awaiting a possible victor.

Alone in the stable, with only the faraway sounds of rejoicing, Giorgio
fell face down in the straw. "Mammina! Mammina!" he sobbed, and the
tears so long inheld were unloosed. As he cried himself out, the sea
of taunting faces melted away, and in their stead his mother's face
appeared, trying to soothe him, to comfort him. "Giorgio, Giorgio,
Giorgio," she called.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day millions of people were reading newspaper accounts of
the Palio. Sports writers from Rome, from Florence, from Milan called
it "The Race of the Broken Heart." They referred not to the death of
Turbolento. That was gallant. For a horse to be killed on the field,
like a soldier in battle, was beautiful. But the injury to Farfalla's
leg, they said, was not only painful to her and perilous to all, but to
watch her hobbling three times around the course to the very end was
heartbreaking. Better she, too, had been killed.

Thus, in a few paragraphs, the race passed into history. For weeks,
however, the fate of Farfalla was tossed about like a frail boat in a
storm. One doctor gave her an even chance of going sound again. Another
spoke frankly to her owner as father to son.

"Celli," he said, "you are a man most benevolent, but that poor mare
is suffering, and time will not lessen her pain." He shook his head in
sympathy. "I suggest you put her down, and the sooner it is done, the
better."

Unwilling to be convinced, Doctor Celli called in a third veterinarian,
a gnomelike creature with a short clipped mustache and a short clipped
way of speaking. After examining Farfalla, who was biting at her
manger, he made his pronouncement: "This Palio will be her last. I
would at once put an end to her sufferings. What pleasure in this life
does she have?"

For hours after the veterinarian had gone, Doctor Celli paced to and
fro in the room where he kept his guns and hunting trophies. It was
difficult to listen to one's heart and mind at the same time. As a
banker he was a careful man, reasoning always with his pocketbook. A
sick horse was a luxury he could ill afford. If the best doctors were
ready to sign her death warrant, who was he to say, "No, this I will
not do!" Yet he could not help wavering.

Perhaps, he mused, someone else would have more time to give her, more
time to look in on her during the day instead of only at sunup and
sundown. Would Signor Busisi know of someone? A talk with the old and
wise man might be of help.

Feeling somewhat lifted in his heart, Doctor Celli went to his garage,
backed out his car, and sped toward Siena. He would lay the facts in
the palm of his friend and ask for a plain answer.

Within the half hour the door to the house of Busisi was opening wide
and the sad, kindly face of the Signore was smiling in welcome.

"Buona sera, Celli. Come in! Come in!" The old man led the way to the
dining table and pulled out a chair. "Enjoy with me the simple pleasure
of food and drink. I am alone. My wife has gone to the church. Let us
eat first. Then we talk of Farfalla."

There was a bottle of good red wine on the table and a nice assortment
of cheeses. Signor Busisi fixed a plate of them for his guest. Without
any heart for it, Doctor Celli took a small bite of the gorgonzola.

The old man remonstrated. "Celli, can you only nibble like the mouse?
Eat with gusto!"

"If I eat now, Signore, the food sits heavy in my stomach. I want only
to talk." He pushed his plate aside. "Already I have summoned three
veterinarians for Farfalla."

"And their verdict?"

"Two advise putting her down. At once."

"You have decided?"

"No. My thoughts seesaw--first one way, then the other. You observed
her in the Palio, Signore. What would you say if she were now fretting
in your stable instead of in mine?"

Signor Busisi's face was grave, deeply concerned. He made a steeple of
his fingertips and looked under them as if he hunted there for the
answer. "Mortals are quick to destroy," he said at last. Already he was
ill of a heart condition, and being on the edge of death himself seemed
to give him a wisdom beyond the common man. "It takes eleven months
and five days for a horse to be born into this world," he said with a
faraway look. "Why do we not give the mare the same number of months
and days before we sentence her to die? Perhaps in that time she will
prove her destiny."

There was a long silence between them. The old man got up, paced the
room thoughtfully, then stood before the window. A blood-red sun was
sinking behind the city wall. With his back to Doctor Celli he said,
"You are not the first to come to me today concerning the fate of
Farfalla."

"So? Who else?"

"The Chief-of-the-Town-Guards. You know him?"

"Si, si. The Chief is a man most compassionate. I once saw him on a
cold, bitter day restore the fallen blanket to an old bony horse."

"But the Chief came only as agent."

"Agent?"

Signor Busisi nodded.

"Agent for whom?"

"For two tradesmen from Seggiano."

"But what could _they_ want with Farfalla?"

"In their hands she would certainly come to a pitiful end. But...."
Signor Busisi came back to the table; he seemed quite out of breath.

"But what?"

"I detected something in the face of the Chief," the Signore went on.
"At first it was only a flicker, then it burst into flame, bright as
the morning sun. You see, he had been charged to buy Farfalla, but
suddenly the truth struck him. He did not want to forward the mare to
Seggiano. He wanted to keep her for himself."

Doctor Celli sat on the very edge of his chair. "What did you tell him?"

"I told him what I once told you."

"You mean about life being a puzzle with odd-shaped pieces?"

The old man threw back his head and laughed. "My boy, you have a
remarkable memory. And I told him also what sweet frenzy it would be
for him in next year's Palio to watch two horses--his own and that of
his contrada."

Doctor Celli smiled. In the hands of the Chief, Farfalla would be
treated well. She might live to race again. She might even....

Signor Busisi broke into his reverie. "I must tell you," he said, "the
Chief's money at present is low, but he is soon expecting payment on
an old transaction, and my advice, Celli, is for you to wait until he
comes to you, ready to buy. Remember this, my friend, a gift horse
seldom is prized."

"I will wait! Gladly! Farfalla meanwhile can rest at my country place,
and my tenant farmer will see to her needs." With a deep sigh of relief
he stood up and raised his glass in a toast. "May the pieces fit again!"

Already the heaviness was lifted from his heart.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                    The Rabbit's Foot and the Horn


The second Palio of 1953 was bloodless, but again it fell short of
Giorgio's dreams. Not until the last moment did any contrada ask him to
ride. Then on a cold-blooded horse he raced for the Panthers. A flashy
bay won for the Forest, but of course Farfalla was not there. Things
might have been different, he thought, if he had had the right mount.
He wondered what had become of her, if she would ever race again.

On a morning soon afterward, Giorgio set out quite early for the weekly
market held in the Piazza del Campo. He was leaving for Monticello that
selfsame day, but first he had a purchase to make. He planned to walk
all the way home to save for his mother the few lire he had left from
his year in Siena. And since it was the season of the rains, he would
need either a raincoat or an umbrella. A raincoat would make him look
more like a successful fantino, but it would cost 5,000 lire, and for
that sum he could buy four umbrellas! Besides, he had ruined his only
satchel with blistering liniments and blue gentian for his horses, and
he would need a carryall for his clothes. By rolling them into small,
bread-size bundles he could pack them between the ribs of an umbrella.
And so, for one price, he would have a traveling bag and a canopy
against the rain.

As he trudged the steep hill of Via Fontebranda, he felt cross-arrows
of sadness and gladness. The sadness was for his performance in the
Palios. Two contradas had believed in him and he had failed them,
miserably. He had failed his family, and himself, too. Even Signor
Ramalli needed him no more; he was selling his horses and would not
start up his stable again until spring, if then.

So now, defeated and discouraged, Giorgio was going back home where he
belonged. That was the wonderful thing about Home. It waited patiently
for you to come back, hero or failure. In his mind's eye he was already
there, his mother singing as she whisked an egg for their soup; his
father contentedly blowing smoke rings; the children poking their
fingers through them. And pervading the whole house was the comforting,
all-is-well feeling, as if downy wings were spread wide and all who
came within were safe.

He was deep in these thoughts as he joined the procession of men with
their baskets and women with their market bags. He decided not to
make his purchase right away, but to move through the crowd, enjoying
the sights and sounds. He had to laugh at a bearded old man in an
ankle-length coat who picked up a lady's mirror and a goose quill from
a counter of trinkets and trifles. Unmindful of anyone else, he studied
his long yellow teeth in the mirror, picked them clean with the goose
quill, and tossed both articles back on the table. Enraged, the man
behind the counter promptly smashed the mirror on the cobblestones.
"You miser! You horse's teeth!" he called out. "For you this means
worst luck."

Giorgio walked on, still laughing. Life was fun, after all. He stopped
at another stand, fascinated by a hawker of handkerchiefs. The man was
wrapping one after another about his fist until the bundle grew big as
a pumpkin. He kept his audience in an uproar as he wound and wound the
white squares. "Peoples!" he shouted. "A thousand uses they have! To
clean the rifle. To strain the jelly. To substitute for the diaper. To
blow the nose, even great one like Pinocchio's. Now, who wants whole
bundle for only two hundred lire. Who wants?"

Hands went up in coveys, like birds flushed from a hedgerow. And the
money poured in. Giorgio could not help wondering if men like this--men
who could make so much money and who could make people laugh, too--did
they have worries inside them?

He went on, through the maze of hardware and pink petticoats and flower
stalls, and the stalls with bright-colored fish and tiny talking
birds. He bought two fish to give to Anna, and a new belt for himself.
At last he came to the umbrellas. Under a bright purple awning they
were hanging down like a stumpy green fringe.

The man selling them was bent double, counting shiny lire from his
pocket into a copper pitcher on the ground. All Giorgio could see of
him was the bright green patch on the seat of his trousers. It was the
same green as the umbrellas!

When the man stopped a moment in his counting to peer around for
customers, Giorgio nearly dropped his fish.

"Uncle Marco!" he shouted. "Uncle Marco!"

With a clanking jangle the remaining money fell into the pitcher
uncounted. The man spun around, at the same time pushing back his
feathered hat and squinting his eyes to make sure. Then he leaped over
the pitcher, grabbed Giorgio by the shoulders, and bellowed for all the
world to hear. "Giorgio! Giorgio Terni!" Fiercely, fondly, he embraced
the boy, kissing him man-fashion, first on one cheek, then the other.

A little crowd began gathering and Uncle Marco smiled beatifically at
the ready-made audience. "Signori!" he announced, "I wouldn't believe
mine eyes. Behold the little runt from Monticello!" He spoke with
reverence, with ecstasy. There were tears in his eyes.

"This brave young fantino," he explained, "is more Sienese than the
Sienese! Some day he will conquer curve of San Martino. You listen to
your Umbrella Man! This boy will be a fantino _formidabile_! The
Palio ... he will win it!"

Red-faced, Giorgio pulled at Uncle Marco's sleeve. "Please, Uncle,
please! I come to buy the umbrella. An oiled-cloth one, because they
are cheaper. You see," he stammered, "today I go home to Monticello."

Uncle Marco slapped his thigh and laughed until the tears streaked down
the furrows of his cheeks.

Giorgio grew angry. Was this a time to laugh? Had the Umbrella Man gone
daft?

"Ah, the sadness so sweet! So joyous!" he sighed, making no sense
whatsoever. A few bystanders nodded, as if they knew a sweet sadness
too. One woman began sobbing softly.

Giorgio tried to back away, but Uncle Marco lifted him bodily off his
feet, giving him a bear hug, almost crushing him in happy excitement.

"Put me _down_! Put me _down_! You spill my fish!"

Uncle Marco set him down as if he were a child. "You listen to me," he
said. "I foresee...." He let the sentence dangle teasingly in midair.
Then to heighten the suspense he whispered in a stage voice directly
into Giorgio's ear. But first he examined the ear, marveling at its
smallness. "I foresee," he said prophetically, "to Monticello you do
not go."

"Oh, but I do! This very morning I go."

"Ho, ho! Listen to him! So little faith has he." Putting his
arm around Giorgio, he faced the audience, sighing deep, as if
he could hold the suspense no longer. "Someone," he pronounced,
"someone _multo importante_ wishes Giorgio to see. No less than the
Chief-of-the-Town-Guards! Himself, the Chief!"

The crowd was enjoying the show, old men clicking their teeth, little
boys nudging one another in envy.

"He wishes to see _me_?" Giorgio asked in disbelief.

"Si, si. He tries everywhere to find Giorgio Terni. First he goes to
the Ramallis'; you not there. They say to him: 'Giorgio, he went to
market to buy the raincoat, or maybe the umbrella.' So the Chief comes
at once to me.

"'Where is Giorgio Terni?' he asks. 'You have seen him, yes?' 'No,
no,' I have to say. 'Him I have not seen in long, long time.' He says,
'Giorgio will come.' 'For certain?' I ask. 'For certain,' he says."

Uncle Marco licked his lips and beamed, first upon Giorgio and then
upon the audience. "So now everything is arranged. You, Giorgio Terni,
must come here to Il Campo tonight at the hour of ten." He pointed
across the Piazza. "Over there at the street café by the Fonte Gaia
will be the Chief. He will await you. So now the umbrella you do not
need. Instead...."

He rummaged in his pockets and pulled out a slender red horn made from
sea coral. It shone brightly in his calloused hand. "Anciently," he
said, crinkling his eyes until they were slits, "Roman gladiators carry
this horn for best luck."

He doffed his hat and bowed as if he were conferring a knighthood. "I
make a present to you, Giorgio." He held it dangling on its string
before the boy, who returned bow for bow but made no comment. He could
see Uncle Marco had more to say.

"And for extra good luck, here is also a small rabbit's foot. An
American lady give it me for a favor. Now I give to you." He pressed
both into Giorgio's hands and smiled exultantly.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                       Gaudenzia, Joy of Living


Ten o'clock seemed years away. To hurry the time, Giorgio went to the
public bath and gave himself a good scrubbing. He worked hard on the
labyrinthian creases in his ears. Perhaps Uncle Marco had examined them
for a reason.

At supper back at the Ramallis' home he ate his macaroni in a trance,
almost forgetting to say "_Buon appetito_" beforehand. There was
chocolate and strawberry ice cream for dessert, served in special honor
of his departure. Absentmindedly, he mashed and melted the two colors
together, toying rather than tasting.

"Is something wrong with the ice cream?" Signora Ramalli asked in
concern.

For answer Giorgio quickly shoved a spoonful into his mouth. How could
he explain his excitement when perhaps it would amount to nothing at
all?

After supper Anna wheedled him into a game of dominoes, but his eye was
on the clock more than on the counters. When at last it was time to go,
he grabbed his jacket and tore down the stairs and out into the street.
He ran swiftly at first; then as the lane twisted and steepened, he had
to slow to a walk. Someone had forgotten to take a parrot inside. The
cage hung on a balcony and its occupant screamed and scolded Giorgio as
if he were to blame.

On ordinary evenings he would have talked back, but tonight nothing
could delay him. He did not even peer into the cobbler's shop for
memory's sake, nor into the public laundry. Nor did he stop to look
through the gates to the great houses.

Tonight he flew by his landmarks as he climbed the Via Fontebranda,
crossed the busy Via di Città and came out at last into the fairyland
of Il Campo. He caught his breath at the contrast from the morning
market. The jumbled confusion of flapping blankets and spreads and
the splashing colors of fruits and vegetables, and the hawkers
screaming--all this was gone. The Piazza was a shell of emptiness. High
up in the palace windows the winking lights seemed faraway planets, but
in the circle of shops below they burned steady and close together like
a necklace of fire opals.

The night was softly warm. A score of small round tables had been
set out in front of the café near the Fonte Gaia. Most of them were
occupied. Giorgio thought he recognized some of the people from Uncle
Marco's audience. He stood facing across the vast square to the canyon
of the street where the Chief lived. It was black as a mousehole. Like
a cat, Giorgio watched it, never taking his eyes away. It was magic
how the Chief came, as if the very looking had pulled him out of the
darkness. At first he was only a tall block of white. Then gradually
the block developed two legs, and with lithe grace they were advancing
across the square, directly toward Giorgio.

When the two met, the Chief purposely stood on the down-slope so that
he and Giorgio were more nearly the same height. Then he glanced up
at the Mangia Tower. The lone hand on the clock pointed almost to the
hour. He smiled in approval.

"We meet early, no?"

Giorgio nodded, too breathless to speak.

"Come, my boy," the Chief said. "See that little table apart from the
others? There the long-eared folk won't hear us."

A waiter arrived at the table simultaneously. "Buona sera," he bowed.
Then he wiped the chair where the Chief would sit, and gave the table
a thorough cleaning. "Now then." He arched his eyebrows, awaiting the
order. "Would you like a chocolate? An ice cream? Or a coffee, perhaps?"

"What will you have, Giorgio?" the Chief inquired.

"I will take a coffee, if you please."

"We will each take the same, waiter."

There was no talk at all before the coffees arrived. Somewhere from the
heights of a palace window came a string of staccato notes, clear and
strong. It was flute music, the "March of the Palio."

Giorgio wiped the anxious moisture from his palms. A distant church
bell chimed the hour. The time had come! And with it the two steaming
cups.

"Sugar?" The waiter held the bowl first for the Chief, then set it down
in front of Giorgio. Two spoonfuls went into each tiny cup, and both
the man and the boy stirred vigorously, as if they had no other thought
on their minds. In unison, too, they sipped the sweet bitterness.

At last the Chief looked directly at Giorgio. "Well, boy? Did you go
today to the Street Market?"

"Si, si."

"Did you buy the umbrella?"

"No, Signore." Giorgio hesitated. "You see, Uncle Marco is my very good
friend. He said the umbrella now is not needed. Instead, he gave me,
for luck, a coral horn and a rabbit's foot."

A smile crossed the Chief's lips. "I will start from the first." He set
down his cup. "Now then! Two tradesmen from Seggiano have engaged me to
purchase for them the mare, Farfalla."

Giorgio drew in a quick breath. Why did the very mention of her name
give him a shock?

"They have commissioned me," the Chief went on, "to make the purchase
from Doctor Celli and to forward the mare to Seggiano."

"But why? Is it for the racing?"

The Chief shook his head sadly. "I prefer not to think of her fate.
Those men are traders in all manner of beasts."

"Could you ..." Giorgio's mind darted ahead. He grew startled at his
own daring. "Please, Signore, could you not buy the mare yourself?"

For a moment there was stony silence. Then in a voice cold and stern,
the Chief asked, "Who told you to say this? Signor Busisi? Doctor
Celli?"

"Oh no, Signore."

"Are you certain?"

"I am certain."

The big man relaxed, and his face broke into a pleased grin. "Good! A
boy who can read a man's mind can also read a horse's." Then he leaned
forward, punctuating his words with excited gestures. "Already have I
gone to Signor Busisi. I tell him I am commissioned to buy the mare,
but in my heart I hide the secret hope of keeping her."

Giorgio barely managed to get the next words out. "Is all settled?"

"No, no. Nothing is settled! With her what would I do? Where would I
keep her? Who would exercise her? I have nobody to do this. Besides,
she has the nervous malady."

Giorgio's mouth went dry. He could not speak. He took a gulp of coffee,
but still no words came.

The Chief was using both hands now, his words ringing sharp and clear.
"In spite that she did not reach expectation, in spite that she is
tortured by the bad leg and the nervous tic, the daughter of Sans Souci
deserves better than to be put down."

Suddenly the boy found his voice. "Oh, I believe it, too! I believe!"

"The money to buy her--that I now have."

Giorgio's heart raced. He thought he had the answer. He knew it was the
answer. "I ... _I_ will train her!" he gasped.

There was no reply. Only the flute piping in the palace window.

Giorgio leaped to his feet, almost upsetting his chair. "Do not worry
about the stable," he said. "In the Maremma I can winter her. Babbo
has a very nice barn. Nobody lives there, nobody but little Pippa, our
donkey."

Still no reply.

Giorgio persisted. "Signore! I myself can ride her to Monticello. At
once!"

The Chief pursed his lips, thinking. There was worry in his face as
he mulled over the proposal. He had asked expressly for this meeting,
had hoped earnestly that Giorgio would have the same desire to
rescue the mare. But now he was appalled by the depth of the boy's
emotion. He studied the slight figure, the young face so full of eager
determination. What if the mare were beyond help? Was the boy's faith
too high a price to pay? What would happen to him if he failed?

Their eyes met and held. Giorgio put out his hand and suddenly the
Chief reached across the table and took it in a clasp so strong it
seemed as if some unseen force were bringing them together. For a
moment they both fell silent, tasting their dreams. Giorgio was living
his day of triumph. He saw the Palio square alive with people, and
heard voices crying the names of their contradas, but mostly they were
screaming to a white mare, winging her in.

Still handfast, the Chief cried, "_Forza! Forza!_"

The waiter came running. "You call me?"

"No, no," the Chief laughed heartily. "We are in the Palio."

The waiter nodded in complete understanding. There was nothing
surprising in this.

"Giorgio!" The Chief spoke now in whispered confidence. "No wonder
Farfalla fails. Who wants 'butterfly' for horse? We change her name! I
am a man very earthy. For me, _Gaudenzia_ is the name I favor. It is
strong like marching music. Gau-den-zia," he repeated softly, lingering
over each syllable. "_Joy-of-living._ You like?"

"I like!"

The Chief squared his shoulders. "From this very moment," he said, "the
destiny of the mare changes. She will get a new name, a new life!"

"Gau-den-zia, Gaudenzia." Slowly Giorgio tested it on his tongue. The
happiness was almost beyond bearing.

"That Uncle Marco," chuckled the Chief, "did he not save you the price
of the umbrella? Who could hold the umbrella on horseback? It is only
for sultan of the desert, not for warrior of the Palio!" He threw back
his head, laughing as light-heartedly as a boy, and the flutter of
notes from the palace window echoed their happiness.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                       Back Home to the Maremma


The next morning broke clear and cool, and Giorgio set out before sunup
for Doctor Celli's villa. He carried only a small parcel containing
his clothes, which were wrapped about a chunk of bread and a salami.
If Gaudenzia was fit to travel, he would make her load as light as
possible.

The shadowed road was still cool from the night, and the birds only
beginning to sing. Giorgio whistled as he strode along, and the notes
came so light and fast he could hardly keep up with them. The song
he whistled was about the common road to glory, and there was such a
bursting in his chest that he half ran the shadowy climbing way to the
villa on the hilltop.

The sun was less than an hour high when he stood at Doctor Celli's
door, completely out of breath. "Suppose," he suddenly thought, "the
doctor is a late riser! Suppose word has not reached him that I am
coming and he is off hunting rabbits in the hills. Suppose the weasely
groom is in charge!"

But before Giorgio could pick up the brass knocker, a beautiful shiny
one made in the image of a unicorn, the door opened wide and Doctor
Celli, with a dog at his heels, stepped outside.

"Buon giorno," he smiled in welcome. "Your whistling and the barking
of my hound announced you well ahead of time. Before I take you to the
mare, I have some things to explain." He led the way to an ornamental
bench in the midst of a rose garden, and motioned Giorgio to sit beside
him. The red-eyed hound nosed the boy appraisingly, then flopped at his
feet.

Doctor Celli began, choosing his words carefully. "To you, I believe I
can talk as man to man."

Giorgio felt a stab of uneasiness at the tone of voice. He reached down
and scratched the dog's head, trying not to show concern.

"I doubt the mare is fit for travel," the doctor went on. "The hurt
tendon still gives her much discomfort. Maybe in a month or two she
will be ready. And if, in the meanwhile, you wish to stay here and work
in the grape harvest, I would be pleased."

"A month or two!" Giorgio stared at the man, unbelieving.

Doctor Celli got to his feet and touched Giorgio on the shoulder.
"Follow me," he said, and he walked down the path to a cluster of
outbuildings. "I will show you where she is stabled. I have no groom
now, so her bed may be soiled and her white coat stained." And in the
same breath he added, "Poor beast, it was an evil bump she had in the
Prova. The cartilage above the hoof is badly damaged, and the nervous
tic tortures her. But of these maladies you are already aware."

He turned to smile at Giorgio as they came to a halt before the
closed door of a narrow stone building. He made no move to open
it. "Sometimes with strangers she is quite savage," he explained.
"Therefore, I think it imperative that you establish at once who is
master. Perhaps," he questioned, "perhaps you wish to go in alone?"

Giorgio looked at the forbidding, heavy door. He drew a deep breath,
hesitated, then lifted the latch and pushed. The creaking of the hinges
sent Farfalla rearing to the rafters. Quietly Giorgio stepped inside
and closed the door. He stood transfixed at the change in her--the ribs
showing, the mantle harsh. Her stall was big enough, but lit by only
one window, too high for looking out. It smelled of cold earth and hay
and dung. All this he sensed in some faraway place in his mind. He had
never before been alone with the mare, and he stood motionless, making
no sound.

She too was electric with curiosity, pulling in the scent of him,
blowing it out with a rattling snort.

"I am here," the boy said in a quiet tone. "It's only me."

The mare's head jerked high, her nostrils flared red, her ears
flattened. "Stay back!" she warned. Fear was strong in her, but spirit,
too. When Giorgio did not retreat, she wheeled about, took aim, and
like a cat ready to spring, she gathered herself for a mighty kick.
In the split second before her heels lashed out, he leaped against
her rump, pressing his body hard against her. She was trapped as if
her hind legs had been hobbled! Through his clothes he could feel her
break out in lather. He too was drenched in sweat. Relief and happiness
flooded into him as her muscles relaxed. He had won the first skirmish.

He went around now to her head and gently took hold of her halter.
"You, so soft-eyed," he said. "You could not hurt me. Not ever. I am
not afraid. Why are you afraid? Come," he coaxed, trying the new name
softly. "Come, Gau-den-zia." And he led her out into the morning.

Doctor Celli could not hide his surprise. "Colombo!" he shouted to his
farmer, who was throwing a pan of soaked acorns to the sow. "Look here!
Already she knows who is master."

The farmer and Doctor Celli stood back in amazement while Giorgio
lifted her hurt foot and held it between his knees. Carefully he
pressed his hand from her hock down her cannon bone and along the
tendon to a point just above the fetlock. To his great relief he could
tell that the tendon was not bowed.

"The leg," Giorgio said, "should be rested if...."

Doctor Celli nodded. "So I told you! A month, maybe."

"No! No!" the boy spoke quickly. "If the tendon bowed out, then she
would need rest. But now we got to keep her leg moving. The gristle
otherwise will harden."

The men exchanged glances, eyeing each other with doubtful, questioning
looks.

Giorgio pretended not to notice. He spoke with a bold sureness that
surprised even himself. "If you please," he said, "I now make a
poultice of flour and alum for the bruised place, and if you don't
mind, we leave at once. It is sixty kilometers to Monticello and I must
stop often to rest her."

The farmer disappeared to fetch the flour and alum, and Doctor Celli
himself produced the bridle.

"She does not willingly take the bit," he said. "I will help you."

Giorgio smiled and shook his head. He led the mare inside her stable
and cross-tied her to iron rings fastened to opposite walls. Then he
saw that underneath her chin was a raw, red place. He thought a moment,
and took from his pocket the rabbit's foot. Much as he prized it for
a good luck charm, he skinned it and wrapped the soft fur about the
chinstrap of the bridle.

"Now, Gaudenzia," he said as if he were talking to a small child, "with
rabbit's fur the strap will not chafe the sore spot."

It took only a little firmness to slip the bit between her teeth and
to adjust the throat latch. And she actually pushed her leg against
Giorgio's hand while he bound the poultice in place.

       *       *       *       *       *

For as long as he lived, Giorgio knew he would never forget this day.
Of all the masters Gaudenzia had known, she had singled _him_ out as
the one to trust! Why else did she let him leap aboard without bolting?
Why else did she travel the mountainous country with scarce any
favoring of her hurt leg? Why else did she swivel her ears to pull in
his talk, or a snatch of his song?

The trip took all day, with Giorgio walking up the hills and riding
down. Whenever they came to a stream, he let her wade into it, let
her paw and plash to her heart's content. It was a remedy Babbo had
handed down. "One thing you must know about horses," he had said time
and again. "Soak hurt feet and legs in mountain streams, and you leave
behind the fever and the pain."

Giorgio wished he could make the day last forever. In riding, he and
Gaudenzia fitted together as if some sculptor had molded them all of
one piece. In walking, they were a team, enjoying the cool wind in
their faces and the warm sun on their backs.

It was good to see the country again! The little checkerboard farms
with rows of grapevines holding hands, and hills swelling away to the
horizon, and cypress trees marching bold and black against the sky.

They met farmers with guns on their shoulders, and lean dogs nosing
for game. And they saw oxen slow-footing as they turned over the clods
of earth.

They saw strawstacks, layered golden and brown, like mocha tortes. At
thought of the tortes Giorgio was suddenly hungry. Standing at the side
of the road, one arm through the reins, he ate his bread and salami
and watched Gaudenzia graze. He wondered how far into the distance she
could see. He studied her purple-brown eyes, but all he saw in them was
his own reflection.

The sun was slipping into the folds of the mountains when they reached
the wild loveliness of the Maremma. Never had it seemed so boundless.
To Giorgio it was not lonely looking at all. He bristled at the
thought. To him the tangle of brush and brake was beautiful, and the
wild birds more plentiful than anywhere, and the autumn weeds winking
bright and yellow in the roughed-up land. He stopped at a small wayside
shrine decorated with a bouquet of dahlias, and asked a blessing for
his new responsibility.

As they took off again, he noticed that the mare had lifted one of the
flowers from the shrine. He laughed to the wind and the echo rolled
back to him.

At last, in the thickening twilight, they wound up the hill to the
huddled houses of Monticello. He clucked to Gaudenzia, asking her to
trot the last few meters home in triumph. Her hoofbeats alerted the
whole village.

Shutters flew open. Heads popped out. Voices shouted.

"Look! Look what Giorgio brings home! A white scarecrow!" And the
children made a sing-song of it. "A white scarecrow! A white scarecrow!"

"Hey, Giorgio! She's got ribs like a washboard!"

"If you sell her for nothing, I wouldn't buy."

The jokes were all good natured, and in high spirits Giorgio leaped
from Gaudenzia's back and led her to Pippa's stable. But Pippa was not
there. In her place stood a red motor scooter with Babbo's old cap on
the handle bars.

For a moment Giorgio felt grief. Then he wiped it away as if it were a
cobweb. He had to think ahead now. "It is better Pippa is not here,"
he said to the mare. "Nobody now can be jealous." He showed Gaudenzia
around, showed her the old donkey cart and the trunk with the oats in
it and the big wide windows. "You have only a little alley for view,"
he explained, "but nicer than Doctor Celli's stable with windows too
high for seeing out. No?"

As he took off her bridle, she rubbed her head against him where
the leathers had been. He sighed happily, feeling singled out and
special again. "At last you have come to me!" he said. Then he went
to the trunk and scooped up a measure of grain. Before pouring it
into the manger he sifted it between his fingers, removing the dried
grasshoppers and beetles.

It was late evening when his family returned home from the farm where
they had been gathering grapes. But they all had to see the mare, and
admire her points, even though she was not in a welcoming mood.

That night when Giorgio went to bed in the family bedroom he did not
mind that Emilio, with arms and legs flung wide, slept crosswise,
taking up most of the bed. As the wind blew cool, he pulled up the
cover, making it snug about Emilio's back. It was good to feel cozy and
warm and welcome; good to belong to a family again.

Before he dozed off, he saw through the open window a fingernail
moon far away above the mountain. A new moon, a new mare, a new
beginning....




                              CHAPTER XIX

                           No Morning Glory


When Giorgio awoke the next morning he felt whole and strong and full
of purpose. He hurried at once to the barn and set to work. He grained
Gaudenzia and gave her fresh water. Then he nailed hardwood boards over
the lower half of the two windows. "In case of kicking," he explained
to an early visitor, "splinters of wood are better than splinters of
glass."

Word quickly flew from house to house that "the little runt of
Monticello" was back home with a race mare. Neighbors, relatives,
friends came from far and near just to look. A few recognized that she
was Farfalla, the cart horse, but they seemed puzzled by her fineness,
awed by the Arabian head. In her shabby harness they had never really
noticed her before. They were not speechless, however. The advice
Giorgio got was enough to fill a book.

"Worm her! It is the worms that make her thin."

"Mix tiny pinches of snuff with her grain."

"Pull her shoes at once, before she kicks you over the moon."

Giorgio listened with only half his mind. He wondered how he was going
to handle the curious visitors and get his work done, too. But the
novelty soon wore off. For everyone, that is, except Giorgio.

Each time he opened the door to her stable he felt the same inward
excitement as on the first day he had seen her. And each time he held
the water bucket for her to drink, or felt her head scratching against
his shoulder, the joy was so deep the whole world seemed different.
It wasn't exactly a fatherly feeling he had; it was stronger, more
fantastic, as though he lived in ancient times and some oracle had
said: "Fate has given her to you. You, Giorgio Terni, are all to
her--master, teacher, god. Now prepare her for the great battle of the
Palio."

Never before had Giorgio paid much attention to calendars; he had
enjoyed the pictures on them and noticed the holidays. But now,
suddenly, the pages of the months flashed and signaled importantly.

Hanging on a nail in Gaudenzia's barn, beside the bunches of drying
anise-seed, were several dusty old calendars. The top two were 1948 and
1949, but they would do. He tore off the first eight months of 1948 and
wrote on the bottom of the page marked _Settembre_, "Rest her."

On _Ottobre_ he wrote, "Walk her four kilometers."

On _Novembre_, "Walk three, jog one."

On _Dicembre_, "Walk two, jog two."

On the 1949 calendar, for _Gennaio_ he wrote, "Walk one, jog three,
gallop one."

On _Febbraio_, "Two-two-two."

On _Marzo_, "Walk one, trot two, gallop three."

Then he put ditto marks on _Aprile_ and _Maggio_, and for _Giugno_
wrote, "Walk one, jog three, gallop three and one-half."

As he lifted the page for _Luglio_ he solemnly circled the second, the
Festival of the Visitation of the Madonna, the day of the Palio. He
turned then to face Gaudenzia and found her blinking at him, yawning in
contentment.

"Our life-threads squinch closer and closer together. No?" he asked of
her. He wanted to say more, to show her he grasped the total wonder of
their fate, but there were things he could not put into words.

With the training program laid out on paper, Giorgio went to work with
a frenzy. He felt that no force on earth could stop him. Each day he
glanced at the calendar on the wall as if it were a generalissimo
barking out orders.

One morning when Gaudenzia stood bridled and ready for exercise, Babbo
burst into the stable with startling news.

"The government!" he announced proudly. "It has jobs--for you and for
me!"

"Jobs?"

"Si, si. Down the slope of Mount Amiata we must plant trees."

"But already there are many!"

"More they need, to hold the soil. You see," he explained, "the rain
washes away the earth, causing great damages. The pay is not much," he
added, "but it helps. We both go."

Giorgio's stomach rose and fell. I will have to tell Babbo "no," he
thought. On the calendar I have already fixed the plans for Gaudenzia.
She is in training for battle; we cannot stop now.

"Babbo," he said, "every morning I take Gaudenzia to the road that
winds round the hills. We walk, and we jog, and then we begin the
gallops and...." He broke off as a sudden thought struck him. Instead
of working Gaudenzia in the morning, he would plant the trees, and take
her out at night. Was not the Palio held at sundown? Why not accustom
her to the late hour?

He smiled. "But from now on I train her by night. Yes, Babbo, I will go
with you. We will plant the trees together."

Later that day the father proudly told the townfolk, "That Giorgio of
mine, he makes of Gaudenzia no morning glory! Horses has time-clocks in
their heads. The morning bloomers wilt by noon. Oh, that boy, he thinks
like the four-footed!"

As the days grew shorter, the workouts grew longer, more intense. Long
walks with little jogs gave way to long jogs with little walks. By
starlight, by moonlight, the white mare rounded the curves of Mount
Amiata like some floating phantom of the night. She was never extended,
never pushed. Without anyone's telling him how or why, Giorgio knew he
had to build up her confidence in herself. Always he stopped short of
what she could do. There was plenty of time to reach the peak. The real
mountain, he knew, was not Amiata.

October, November, and December were torn off the calendar. In January
there were many days of mist and drizzle when Giorgio still had to
work, planting trees. Then no one passed the stable for hours at a
time, and Gaudenzia's nervous twitching came on again and she took to
crib-biting. One dismal evening when he came to bridle her, she stood
grunting as she clamped her teeth on her manger, sucking air into her
stomach. Giorgio tried fastening his belt around her neck, loose enough
so that she could munch grain, but tight enough to prevent her opening
her jaws for swallowing air. It worked! After this, on rainy days,
he made her wear the belt, and all went well. And so, regardless of
weather, they left the stable each evening at the same hour, clattering
down the stony lanes of Monticello, and out upon the lonely road cleft
in the hill.

Nothing was too good for Gaudenzia. He gave her rub-downs, first with
straw, then with burlap bags. He borrowed the flour sifter from home,
and each measure of grain he sifted free of bugs and dust, saving the
dead beetles for the kittens. He begged old sheeting from his mother
and spent precious lire buying cotton and alcohol with which to bandage
her forelegs.

"You cannot even imagine," he told Gaudenzia, "how firm we make your
legs." Sometimes she threatened to bite him as he worked, but she never
did. More often she lipped the back of his sweater, in the way a dam
gently nibbles along the neck of her colt.

Giorgio lived all day--digging and planting--for the night. He might
have been sticking faggots in the earth for all he knew. His mind was
everywhere else: on the calendar in the stable, taking the curves of
the mountain, putting on his helmet for the race. Trumpets and drums
beat like blood in his ears. Unconsciously he began whistling the
"March of the Palio." It made Babbo and all the other men work better,
happier.

The months of winter passed, not in days and weeks, but in developing
Gaudenzia's wind and stamina. When Giorgio came home each night,
mud-spattered and hungry, his mother reheated the soup and stood by as
he drank it. One night when his hair was wet with snow, and his jacket
sagging and sopping, she cried, "Giorgio, Giorgio, Giorgio, why can't
you let up?"

The boy stopped eating. "Mamma, I can't!" he said firmly. "Have you
forgot the Palio? Three times around Il Campo is four and a half
kilometers. She must go the whole way and still be strong at the
finish!"

By March she was galloping three kilometers.

On the fifteenth of May, Giorgio walked her to nearby Casole d'Elsa
and entered her in a race on a straightaway course. She flew ahead at
the start, and with no sign of difficulty, led all the way. It was a
stunning triumph for the mare and her young trainer.

The whole family took a long time deciding where to hang the little
red-and-white flag she won. Teria chose the spot. "Here," she said,
"beside the cupboard. On this wall the sun comes just before setting."

Often, when no one was looking, Giorgio ran his fingertips over the
painting of the white mare on the red silk. Was this the work of a
soothsayer? He read the artist's name in the turf beneath her flying
hoofs. How did the man know that a white mare would win, and so picture
her instead of a black, or a bay? And under the date of the race was
painted a golden crown bright with jewels. Had the oracle spoken to
the artist, too? Or had he seen a boy flying in the night on a white
phantom?

Once when Babbo caught Giorgio fingering the little humps of oil paint
that made the jewels of the crown, he pulled the boy aside. "Jesters,"
he said, not wanting him to be hurt, "sometimes wear the crown like
king and queen. Maybe that artist fellow, he dangles the carrot before
Gaudenzia only to tease."




                              CHAPTER XX

                             A Simple Plan


June! The hallway into summer. The season for strong happenings, the
season for living. Giorgio's mind was on tip-toe. Looking at his
calendar one morning he thought, in a flash, of the ski slide on Mount
Amiata, saw the skiers toiling up and up for one breathless whoosh into
space. Now he knew how they felt. For months he and Gaudenzia had been
toiling up and up for the wild two minutes of glory that was the Palio.

The days of June neither dragged nor flew. They were as alike as
echoes. Walk Gaudenzia one kilometer, jog her three, gallop her three
and a half. Bandage her hind legs, bandage her forelegs. Grain her, a
handful more each day. Cut down her hay. And always, the inner command
pounding through him: Don't let her reach the peak until July. Climb,
climb, climb. Bring her right up _to_ it.

In the last week of June, the long-awaited message from the
Chief-of-the-Guards reached Giorgio. "Come to Siena! At once!" was all
it said.

By cockcrow on the morning after, boy and mare were on their way,
trotting along gay-spirited, as if the wheatfields spattered with
wild red poppies, and the hills high-rising to the sky, and all the
creatures in it were theirs. Gaudenzia wanted to race every moving
thing--a rabbit skirting the edge of the road, a hound streaking for
a bird--the bird, too. Her friskiness, her eagerness to go filled
him with a pride so strong he had to whistle to let the steam of his
happiness escape. Nine months ago, with a bandage on her heel, she had
slow-footed her way over this same road. Now, like Mercury with wings,
she was returning.

A solitary shepherd, hungry for human company, ran out on the road and
invited Giorgio to share the meal he was preparing over an open fire.
He pointed his crook at Gaudenzia.

"_Magnifico!_" he exclaimed, with a smile so wide it showed the dark
hole where two of his teeth were missing.

"Magnific_a_!" Giorgio laughingly corrected him. "She is a mare!" He
joined the herdsman in a meal of goat cheese and grilled eel. And while
the mare grazed, her eyes ranging with the cloud of sheep, the lonely
herder questioned Giorgio about his plans. Then he poured out his own
heart. He too had a dream. He would teach a young boy to herd, teach
him just where to noon the sheep, and which ones to watch in a storm.
Then he would be free for a little while, and he would walk to Siena,
and there, before he died, he would witness with his own eyes the
manifestation of the Palio!

It was all Giorgio could do to break away from the man and his dream.
With their final handshake the herder for the first time became mute.
Wistfully, he watched Giorgio mount Gaudenzia and rein her out onto the
road. When at last he found his voice, he cupped his hands and called
out after them: "Magnifica!"

In Siena, too, the mare created admiration, but it was thinned with
doubts and forebodings. Entering the city through the Arch of Porta
Romana in the early evening, Giorgio could feel at once the general air
of agitation. The usual flow of promenaders had given way to excited
knots of men choking the traffic. Bruco! Oca! Onda! Tartuca! The names
of the contradas punctuated the talk. And town eyes were staring his
way.

"What a beautiful beast goes there!" a voice said. And the same voice
asked, "Boy, where did you get her? What are you going to do with her?"

Giorgio turned and saw a grizzle-headed old man, the center of a group.
"It's a long story, Signore," he answered. "She used to be Farfalla,
but now she--"

The man did not let him finish. "Eh?" he exclaimed. "Can this be
Farfalla returned from the dead?"

And another said, "A fine parade horse she would make. But for the
race?" The shoulders owning the voice shrugged.

And then Giorgio overheard, "Would you wish to draw her for _your_
contrada?"

A whole chorus answered, "No! No!" It was as if her tortured limping in
last year's Palio was a memory too fresh to be wiped out.

Giorgio himself flinched at the recollection. He touched his heels
to Gaudenzia and hurried her through the crowd. "How they feel about
you, I do not care," he told himself. "It is better so. Popular horses
are nearly killed by too many sweets, too much petting and pulling of
tail-hairs for souvenir. I believe, and the Chief believes!"

He found the Chief striding across Il Campo, heading for his home. They
saw each other at the same moment.

"Giorgio!" the big man shouted, and his arms flung wide apart, as
though he would clasp the boy and the mare both. "How are you? How
is it with our _cavallina_? Tell me all about her! Don't keep me one
minute more in this anxious waiting."

Giorgio suddenly felt shy. He answered with two little words. "All
fine."

"That I can see!" the Chief laughed. "The mare, she is rekindled!" He
stepped now in front of Gaudenzia, pulled off his white gloves, and
with both hands felt of her chest and forearms. "Not even sweating," he
nodded in approval. "Come, let us walk to the stable, and while walking
you will tell me how she goes in her work. Then, after she is bedded
down, you will come to my home where we can engage in serious talk."

The stable was midway of a narrow downhill alley with walls high-rising
on either side. Giorgio's spirits plummeted at its darkness. It did
have a window, but it was covered by a curtain of gunny sacking. There
were two stalls divided by heavy planking. The one nearer the door
was occupied by a bay gelding, and the other, deeply strawed, awaited
Gaudenzia.

"To find stable room is very difficult," the Chief was explaining. "But
Morello here is a good horse and the two will become friends and help
each other to forget the Maremma. He, too, comes from your wilderness."

Across the partition Gaudenzia and Morello began at once to get
acquainted--first in screams, then nips, and at last in low whinnies.

"How quick they make friends!" the Chief grinned. "Now then, the hay is
piled here, the grain is in the sack yonder, and the medicines in the
cabinet. Now you can take over."

Giorgio noted the racks already filled, the water buckets brimming. He
would come back later to grain and groom Gaudenzia and to remove the
gunny-sack curtain.

He followed the Chief to his home, which perched on a ledge of rock
like an eagle's nest. The view was miniature compared to the world of
the Maremma. Below was a tiny dim valley, and climbing the opposite
hillside were busy little farm plots. But the same deep sky was
overhead and the same stars beginning to punch holes in the blue.

The Chief's wife and daughter greeted Giorgio with politeness and
relief. "The supper is ready," the Signora said with a hot-stove smile.
"I would not want the chicken to cook a moment longer."

The meal was a feast such as Giorgio had not tasted since his days
at the Ramallis'. First there was a piping hot broth of chicken with
tiny pearls of dough swimming along the bottom. Then came a beautiful
plate of antipasto--black olives, and mushrooms in oil, and little
white onions, and small green peppers, and anchovies curved into tight
nests, with a caper on each. Giorgio was encouraged to take something
of everything. And still he had room for a drumstick and breast of
chicken, and a baked tomato stuffed with ground beef.

All of this he sluiced down with a red Chianti wine which he thriftily
diluted with water as though he were at home.

The Chief helped himself to the food sparingly, and in silence. He
seemed preoccupied, brooding. But Giorgio ate heartily. The Signora
beamed at him. "For a small man, as you are," she said, appreciatively,
"you have _un bel appetito_."

Giorgio felt his face flush and his ears redden at the half-and-half
compliment.

With the dessert of fruit and cheeses on the table, the wife and
daughter disappeared into the kitchen. The silence grew heavy. The
Chief pushed back his plate without touching the food. At last the
moment for talk had arrived.

But the words did not come. He ran his finger around the inside of his
collar and cleared his throat. He got up and stood at the open door,
looking out upon the night. He came back and sat down again. Then,
gripping the edge of the table, he blurted out, "My boy, the Palio is
not going to be as we dreamed it."

Giorgio swallowed whole the apricot in his mouth. It was as though an
icy hand had gripped his throat.

"You see, the _people_ want beautiful horses such as Gaudenzia, but the
judges, no!"

Giorgio's voice sank back so deep inside him it was scarcely audible.
"But why?"

The Chief took a breath. For the boy's sake he wanted to sound
matter-of-fact, to ease him gently into disappointment. "The news of
Gaudenzia's win at Casole d'Elsa has spread to Siena. All at once
she is known as the get of Sans Souci, a full-blood Arab. And the
full-bloods are not wanted."

"But, Signore, she is only half-bred. Her dam was a farm horse."

"I know, I know," the Chief answered in irritation. "But because she is
now too beautiful, too well-trained, the rejection may come."

Giorgio waited in numbness.

"High-mettled Arabians have caprices, the judges say. Besides, the
turns of the course are too perilous and the layer of earth over the
cobblestones too thin for a full-blood with the delicate toothpick
legs."

There was a momentary pause as the Chief's daughter brought in two
small cups of coffee.

"You see, Giorgio, we Sienese are like moles burrowing, always digging
into our past. I have heard the judges say, as if only yesterday it
happened, how in the year 1500 Cesare Borgio's big stallion reared on
his hind legs and in coming back to earth hit the starting rope so hard
he could not run in the Palio. And in 1885, the purebred La Gorgona
cracked up in the last Prova, her legs brittle like eggshell. And you,
Giorgio, you must remember Habana? You remember when she flew into the
fence, and broke the boards to splinters!"

"But Signore! It happens with the mixed blood, too. Have they forgot
Turbolento?"

"_He_ fell, Giorgio. But the others? One might say they destroyed
themselves."

Anger lit Giorgio's eyes. "Signore! This you should have told me
before! Why did you send for Gaudenzia and me? Why did you let me
nourish all the hopes to win?"

The Chief wiped his face tiredly. "I do not know, truly. Perhaps the
hope is in me, too. Perhaps the hope is stronger than the reality. I
fear, Giorgio," he said again, "the Palio is not going to be as we
dreamed it."

"Signore! Shake yourself!" Giorgio's anger turned to wild appeal. His
words tumbled out bravely, recklessly. "Something we can do! Something
we _must_ do! Think!" He took hold of the man's sleeve, actually
shaking him in his eagerness.

The Chief closed his eyes thoughtfully. "What comes to mind," he said
at last, "is a very simple plan. Maybe too simple."

"Tell me! Tell me!"

Something of the old vigor crept into the Chief's voice. "Listen well,
my boy. In the trials when the horses are selected, you must make
Gaudenzia appear mature, sensible; an average beast."

Giorgio nodded, listening with every fiber.

"And in her workouts she must appear tranquil."

"That is easy! Easy! What else?"

"Wherever you make talk, you must say how her dam was a poor old farm
horse and how she herself was a cart horse for many years, and her
colts were nothing at all, good only for the slaughterhouse."

"I will!"

"Margherita," the Chief called to his daughter, "our coffees are now
cold." He turned back to Giorgio. "Only one thing is in our favor. You
see...."

There was a pause as the coffees came and he liberally spooned
sugar into both cups. "Because all the contradas think her nervous,
unpredictable, none will ask for agreement from you to help another
horse to win."

Giorgio sighed in deep relief. "Of that I am glad. When I am on
Gaudenzia I am _simpatico_ only to her. But why is it no one has ever
come to me to make the secret agreement?"

The Chief could not help chuckling. "'The runt of Monticello', they
say, 'is young and green like new spear of wheat. We do not make
agreements with a boy so little he has to have double lining in his
helmet to keep it on.'"

The man suddenly went silent. What if Giorgio were not asked to ride
Gaudenzia in the Palio? He held his tongue. The boy had had enough
worries for one night.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                               Half-bred


Tuesday, June 29. Morning. The whole city seething in warlike
impatience. Il Campo in battle array. Everything ready for the trial
of the horses. The stout railing around the shell to keep the people
from spilling onto cobblestones. The mattresses, upright, lining the
treacherous curves. The tiers of seats rising in front of the palaces
and shops. The high platforms for the judges and dignitaries. The bomb
cage on stilts, looking like an oversized parrot cage, ready for the
charge of gunpowder.

And people converging from all directions, talking excitedly with their
hands, their voices. Which horses will be chosen to run? Surely not the
old one who has twelve years! Surely not the little one with the ewe
neck? Surely not Gaudenzia with the hot blood in her veins?

The lone hand on the clock of the Mangia Tower points to nine. Within
the courtyard of the Palazzo Pubblico seventeen horses and riders are
ready. Giorgio is ready. He has done everything the Chief asked. And
more. He has plastered sculptor's clay on Gaudenzia's legs to make them
look coarse, like those of any cold-blooded hack. But there is nothing
he can do to coarsen her fine, intelligent head.

Out in the shell, a little insect of a man, known as the Spider, climbs
his ladder, touches a match to the gunpowder in the cage, and with a
thundering _bang_ the trials have begun! Four horses prance out of the
palace courtyard. At the starter's signal they take off, leaping over
the rope before it touches the earth. At the very first curve one horse
falls, skids across the track like a slab of ice. The crowd screams as
the horse scrambles to his feet. He will be rejected. It is Fate.

Another group is called. No falls this time, but the horses are not
evenly matched. They straggle along like knots on a string.

And still another group, while Gaudenzia waits. She listens to the
hoofbeats. Flecks of foam come out on her body. Her whole being asks:
Why are we not out there with the others? She whinnies out after them.
Giorgio lays quieting hands on her, soothes them along her neck and
withers. He is glad her mantle is gray so the sudsy foam does not show.

At last she is called with the remaining five. Her long-reaching legs
are ready. Her heart and lungs are ready. Giorgio mounts. His heart
tightens in sudden doubt. Is speed her only virtue? Has she learned
obedience? He wets his parched lips, prays fiercely. "O Holy One, let
her be in the middle! Don't let her run away and set the pace. Let her
just be middling!"

The starter steps on the lever. The rope, set free, snakes crazily
to earth. Five horses leap over it. They're away! Evenly! Past the
scaffold of the judges, past the Fonte Gaia. One horse tries to wing
out at the incoming street of San Pietro, but the others are moving in
a bunch. "Oh, Mamma mia! Don't let her win! Don't let her!"

She is third at the curve of San Martino, and third at the Casato.
Suddenly she asks to arrow out in front, but she feels the bit pulling
up into her mouth, exerting more and more pressure on her tongue. She
slows. She lets Giorgio hold her. She obeys!

Out of the first realization, like the first glint of sunlight from
behind a cloud, Giorgio feels an unutterable joy. Twice around, and
three times around, she lets him hold her! In third place she finishes,
all her fire inheld. The trials are over!

While the judges pondered and debated their decisions, Giorgio rode
into the cool courtyard of the Palazzo. Here were only the sweating
horses and the men, all of them bound together in the misery of waiting.

The Chief-of-the-Guards, immaculate in his starched white uniform,
looked in and strode over to Giorgio. There was a smile of incredulity
on his face.

"I salute you!" he said. "Gaudenzia's disguise was _bellissima_! When
first I saw her at the starting rope, it seemed I dreamt with open
eyes. Even a sculptor, I think, could not have done a better work on
living skin."

He made no effort to hide his happiness, for already he knew the
results of the trials. Already a deputy was fastening a disc numbered
10 to Gaudenzia's cheek strap to show that she had been chosen.

The Chief led Giorgio and the mare out into the Piazza, into a corral
where the ten horses would be on display as at an auction. The big
difference was that here a horse could not be bought; not for any
price. It was assigned to a contrada as irrevocably as a child is born
to certain parents. Here all was luck. A minuscule slip of paper in a
tiny capsule would tell which contrada would win the best horse.

Suspense was growing intolerable. There was wild shouting for the
favorites. Voices came piercing and crashing around Giorgio.

"We want Ravu!"

"We want Uganda!"

"We want Rosetta!"

An official groom shoved Giorgio to one side, took hold of Gaudenzia.
There was now no need for Giorgio. And then, in a flash, he realized
there was no need for him anywhere! The awfulness struck him. For nine
months he had been blindly running up a dead-end street. Feeling
sick and bereft, he went back into the empty courtyard. He picked up
Gaudenzia's rub rag, hung it on a peg. He made meaningless motions of
tidying up. But even here, away from the crowd, he saw the whole scene
in his mind--the Mayor and the captains at the long table, the urns
containing the capsules, the pages and trumpeters waiting. And then,
as in a storm, when thunder rumbles and ricochets from rock to rock,
the voices came booming against the Palazzo wall and into the very
courtyard:

"Number seven, Ravu, to the Ram!"

He could hear the Rams roaring with joy for the favorite.

"Number nine, Pinocchio, to the Giraffe!"

Men and boys howled in derision, "Long Neck gets Long Nose! Long Neck
gets Long Nose."

The roaring was uncontrolled; it subsided only while the capsules were
being opened.

"Number one to the Wolf!"

"Number five to the Dragon!"

"Number two to the Tower!"

"Number ten to Onda, the Wave!"

Giorgio shot out of the courtyard, but the way to the corral was
blocked. By the time he could wriggle through, the drawing was over!
And, suddenly, there was trumpet music, and drums beating wild, and the
barbaresco of the Onda was leading Gaudenzia to their stable. In an
agony of emptiness Giorgio melted into the throng, went tagging along
like some outsider. With no halter or bridle to hold, his hands felt
awkward, useless. A piece of his heart was going away with Gaudenzia.

Should he catch up with the barbaresco and tell him about the
crib-biting? Should he offer his belt? Should he offer to clean
Gaudenzia's stable tomorrow, and tomorrow?

No, everything was out of his control now. In the next moments he lived
a lifetime. No contrada had asked him to be their fantino. Why should
they? In two Palios he had not won.

A fight started in the crowd. A young boy from the Dragon and one
from the Tower began with friendly roughness, yanking each other's
caps, then grabbing contrada scarves, then arms swinging, and fists
pummeling. Giorgio wanted to join in, to throw one and then the other
flat on the ground. Anything would be better than having nothing to do.
Someone in the crowd recognized Giorgio, pointed a finger at him. "Hey,
fantino! Afoot now? Ha! Ha!"

Giorgio leaped at the lanky fellow, ready to land a left jab, when
suddenly his arm was wrenched behind him. A strange, deep voice
commanded: "Hold there, Giorgio! Let up! Street fighting is for boys.
_You_ face the real battle, the battle of the Palio."

Giorgio looked into the eyes of a gentleman. At once he recognized
the man. He had just seen him on the platform with all the officials.
"You!" he gulped for air. "You are General Barbarulli, leader of the
Onda!"

The General smiled. Then he linked his arm into Giorgio's, and above
the din spoke into his ear: "The Chief-of-the-Town-Guards tells me it
is you who trained Gaudenzia."

Giorgio nodded, scarcely breathing.

"A stroke of chance has given her to the Onda, but," the General
slowed his words, emphasizing each one, "but with Giorgio Terni as her
fantino, that is not luck. _That_ is destiny."




                             CHAPTER XXII

                             Speak! Speak!


Immediately after Giorgio's talk with General Barbarulli, four
bodyguards were assigned to him. They were tall, strapping
fellows--Carlo, Pinotto, Enzio, and Nello. Their eyes followed him
wherever he went. They never let him alone. Even at night he could feel
them peering at him, boring right through him in the dark.

"Am I a dog on a leash?" he asked, trying to make a joke of it.

The young men only laughed at the trapped-animal look of him. "We
attach ourselves to you," Carlo said kindly, "to prevent rival
contradas from coming with secret offers."

"But no one will! Even the Chief-of-the-Guards tells me that. He says I
have not yet seen enough Palios."

The boys agreed. "But we must also protect you from street fights,"
Enzio explained. "We must save your hands. They are small as...."

"I know." Giorgio bit his lips, then supplied the missing words. "Small
as girl's hands!"

It was scarcely any relief to swing up on Gaudenzia and ride twice a
day in the Provas. For even then he was not free. He knew that he was
being carefully observed, his every action noticed and weighed.

Why, he asked himself, did it take two Palios to teach him all the
rules and regulations leading up to the big race? He answered himself
honestly. Turbolento and Lirio, the horses he had ridden last year, had
been little more than names to him--no, they had almost been nameless.
But Gaudenzia was a part of his very life.

So now, for the first time, he was terrified by a rule that had not
really concerned him before. According to a proclamation of the Grand
Duke in 1719, the choice of the fantinos is not made final and official
until the day of the Palio. If through Giorgio's carelessness Gaudenzia
were kicked and lamed as in last year's Prova, he could be dismissed
abruptly. He had been hired, yes, but he could still be replaced, even
on the very morning of the Palio!

Thus, tortured by uncertainty, he took great care to keep Gaudenzia
clear of the other horses, and to bring her in slowly at the finish of
each Prova.

At night, however, he and Gaudenzia knew no restraints. When the moon
rode high, he took secret delight in waking his bodyguards, who slept
on mattresses in his room.

"Wake up, or I go alone!" he told the sleepy young giants.

Grumbling, they dressed and went out with him into the night. They
pounded heavily on the locked door of the stable of Onda. It was easier
to wake Gaudenzia than the sleeping barbaresco.

"Open!" shouted Giorgio, and it was the mare's stomping and pawing that
finally woke the groom. She remembered well the routine of galloping in
the dark, and the time clock in her mind said, "Now."

The city lay asleep. In the twisty streets, small yellow flames
flickered here and there before shrines to the Virgin Mary. But in the
shell of Il Campo the moon shone clear and bold.

_This_ was the real Prova! The four young men and the barbaresco,
watching in the deep moon shadow, nearly forgot themselves in awed
excitement. They were fully awake now. They wanted to shout and cheer
at the smooth-flying gallop. Around the treacherous curves Gaudenzia
went flying as if she were suspended on pulleys. Only an occasional
spark from her hoofs showed she was earthbound.

In less than an hour they were all back in bed again. For Giorgio and
Gaudenzia, sleep was sweet after the moonlight gallop.

       *       *       *       *       *

July first, the day before the Palio, turned hot, with a brassy sun.
The morning Prova took place at the hour of nine. General Barbarulli
was on hand to observe, and afterward he stopped Giorgio on the way to
the stable. He looked at Gaudenzia, but not at her head. He seemed to
see only the heel that had been hurt last year.

"She goes sound?" He clipped out the questions. "She goes true? Her
legs, are they cool after the running?"

"Si, si, General."

"The Provas are nearly over, son. Already there have been four. If all
goes well in the last two, you will be fantino for the Contrada of
the Wave, and tomorrow your name will be inscribed in the archives,
officially."

Giorgio managed an anxious nod. He waited for the General's next words.

"Thus far she has not won a single Prova." Something in the man's voice
told Giorgio that he was in no way displeased.

"Tonight," he went on, "is the banquet before the Palio. As you know,
it is the great meeting of our people. You must come and you will be
seated between Captain Tortorelli and myself. Your bodyguards will
bring you at the hour of eight. From you only a short speech will be
expected."

"A speech! Me? A speech!" Giorgio grabbed a handful of Gaudenzia's mane
as if he might topple off. The bodyguards came up then to accompany him
to the stable. His lips moved drily. "A speech I must make," he mumbled
in deep misery.

       *       *       *       *       *

All that afternoon Giorgio struggled with pencil and paper. As the
result of his labors he produced only three small sentences. These he
copied neatly on a clean sheet and folded it into the breast pocket of
his good suit.

Promptly at the stated hour Pinotto, Carlo, Enzio, and Nello led him
toward the church of the Wave. He felt like a prisoner on his way to
execution, as they wound in single file through the narrow streets,
through the arch of San Guiseppe, then through the doors of the church
itself, and down the wide, winding staircase into another world deep
under the sanctuary.

Giorgio stood gaping at the splendor. The banquet hall was high-vaulted
and vast. Already many people were seated in their places at the
rows of tables, but some were still standing in clusters, deep in
conversation. With the entrance of the burly guards towering over the
slight figure of Giorgio, all faces turned in his direction.

"Look! Our fantino! He comes!"

General Barbarulli signaled the bodyguards to come to the speakers'
platform. For one frozen moment Giorgio saw the scene and remembered.
Yes! There was the long table on the raised flooring, and the snow-pure
cloth spread over it, and the serious-faced men seated on one side
only. It was like the painting of the Last Supper, the one hanging
above his mother's and father's bed. Overawed, he wanted to bolt,
wanted to hide behind his bodyguards, but they were gone! They had
stepped down from the platform and melted into the crowd.

The General and Captain Tortorelli welcomed Giorgio with cordial
handshakes. Nervously, he felt for his speech in the place where his
pocket should be, but his hand felt cotton, not wool, and he looked
down and saw he had no pocket! He remembered now he was wearing the
uniform of the Wave, the white-and-blue fantino uniform which the
contrada had sent over. His speech was still in his room, in the pocket
of his good suit hanging on the peg!

The Captain shook his hand a second time. "Do not worry," he said
encouragingly. "All good fantinos are nervous. Those who joke have a
gross heart." Then he introduced Giorgio to the vicar, the chancellor,
the captain's assistant, the steward, and all the councilors.

When the food was served, Giorgio ate, though he hardly knew what he
ate. His ears heard the stirring battle songs of defiance, of threats,
but all the while his mind was trying to recall those three little
sentences he had painstakingly written down. They were gone from him.
Gone as completely as if some other hand had formed them.

"We are all united in the warm atmosphere of this dinner. In joy and
friendship...."

"Oh, Mamma mia!" breathed Giorgio, dropping his fork with a clatter.
"The speeches, they begin!"

"We of the Wave," the General was intoning, "regard this, our
banquet hall, as our other home, our other hearth-place of Love and
Brotherhood. Many of our families have separated for the Palio, each
member having gone back to the contrada where he was born. In their
place, many of us are hosts to some kinsman or friend. So first we
greet and welcome those who are our guests."

Of one accord the _contradaioli_ applauded.

The General smiled affably. "The Palio lifts us out of the everyday
life," he continued. "We are caught up in the golden net of hope, of
ambition, of glory. In four hundred years the magnificent colors of the
Wave--blue for the billows and white for the foam--have won thirty-nine
victories! Will Gaudenzia and Giorgio make it forty?"

"Si! Si! Si!" Wild cries bounced from wall to wall.

Giorgio listened in an agony of suspense. He could feel his chest going
in and out against the place where his pocket and his speech should
have been. "Please, O Mother of Perpetual Help, let him talk on and on!
Let him forget I am here. Or maybe you could make an earthquake ... or
an eruption like Vesuvius...."

But the only eruption was a burst of applause as the General sat down
and Captain Tortorelli arose.

Giorgio closed his eyes.

Captain Tortorelli half-closed his eyes, too, but _he_ was in ecstasy.
"How beautiful is the Piazza of Siena with ten fantinos in battle!" His
voice resounded through the great hall. "Some call them ten assassins.
Yes, the eyes of an assassin are dangerous, but in the danger they are
fiercely beautiful."

Giorgio began to shake all over. The Captain was making a half turn
toward him, was facing him now, speaking to him, and the force of
his breath caused the hairs on Giorgio's head to quiver. "_Fate_ is
Queen of the Palio!" the voice rolled on. "We can prepare for victory,
morally and materially, but never certainly. Only Fate and the fantino
can decide between victory and defeat.

"Some tasks," he concluded, "need a big man. Others, a small one. Some
fantinos are big and strong, but some are bird-light and think more of
their mount than of their own safety. Giorgio Terni, you are such a
one." He raised his glass in a toast to the boy at his side. "Our fate
is in your hands."

"Bravo! Bravissimo!" the councilmen and contradaioli cheered. Then all
about there was a great gaping silence--full of eyes, full of question
marks. What would the boy say? What promises would he make?

"Speak! Speak!" the people shouted in encouragement.

Giorgio rose to his feet. In the dead silence he nodded to the Captain,
and then to the audience. He opened his mouth, but no sound came. He
glanced imploringly into the sea of faces, but no one could prompt
him. His eyes swept the room, took in the marble angels on either
side of the stage. Their cornucopias were sending forth pink and red
carnations, but not help. And no help came from the painted dolphin
on the wall, its mouth dripping red beads of blood as if it had been
caught by some fisherman's hook. And as he stood helpless the silence
grew deeper, until it was a roaring in his ears. In desperation he
looked upward to the vaulted ceiling, and followed the arches that came
together in a central point. It was like the chalice of an Easter lily;
no, it was more like the inside of an umbrella.

An _umbrella!_ Suddenly the face of the Umbrella Man loomed in front of
him, and in spite of his terror he felt strength welling up in him. Now
he _wanted_ to talk.

"Signori of the Wave!" he began in a voice that had an odd kind of
dignity in it. "Gaudenzia and I, we were both reared in the Maremma,
and we fit well to each other. Tomorrow we go into battle together.
Fear does not choke our courage. For us it is not victory or defeat. We
think only the one thought--"

"_Vic-to-ry! Vic-to-ry! Viva Giorgio!_"

The crowd had finished his speech for him.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                           The Hours Before


Late on the night of the banquet, while Giorgio lay sleeping,
the captains of the contradas were meeting in secret. Some were
strengthening old alliances, and some were negotiating new ones. If one
contrada, for example, had drawn a poor horse, it would swear to help
its ally by every strategy of war.

The results of these meetings were of little concern to Giorgio, for
no one, he had been told, would exact any promises from him. And so,
exhausted from his speech, he had crawled into bed, and before his
bodyguards had stopped joking and smoking he was asleep.

But it was not a peaceful sleep; it was shot through with a frightful
dream. In writing down the name "Giorgio Terni" in the archives, the
clerk broke his pen on the letter G, and the point flew up, stabbing
the man in the throat. Immediately, terrifying things happened. The
statue of the she-wolf atop the Palazzo came alive, came howling and
hurtling down the column and put a horrible end to the clerk. Then she
fell upon Giorgio, slashing him with her fangs and claws until he was
unfit to race.

To the shock of crashing thunder Giorgio awoke. He jumped up, leaped
over the sprawling figures of his guards, and ran to the window. He
stood there, shivering, watching the storm rage. He had a strange sense
that the fire-ball lightning was full of shooting stars, and they
seemed to be spelling out the word--"O-f-f-i-c-i-a-l!" He stood there a
long time, letting the wind and the rain wash away his dream. At last,
chilled to the bone, he went back to bed. Sleep was slow in coming,
and brief. At six in the morning the church bells startled him into
consciousness. The first summons to the Palio!

His bodyguards, yawning and stretching, looked out in surprise at the
rain-soaked land.

"How is it?" Giorgio exclaimed. "If I only turn the door-knob to my
room or make tiny tiptoe steps, you hear! But crashing thunder? _No!_"

The guards laughed. As they dressed, they watched Giorgio fumble with
the ties on his fantino uniform. "Could our boy be nervous?" they
teased. "And him a veteran of two Palios!"

The bells were still playing when, minutes later, they climbed the
steps of Siena's great cathedral. In the shadowy interior, with the
candles winking and the faint light coming through the stained-glass
windows, Giorgio and the other fantinos knelt at the altar. He glanced
at Ivan-the-Terrible on his left, who was riding for the Ram, and at
Veleno on his right, fantino for the Giraffe. They were like friendly
schoolfellows. Could they, by evening, become enemy warriors? Would the
three of them now kneeling prayerfully and peacefully side by side soon
be striking each other with their nerbos?

Both fantinos were moving their lips. Giorgio wondered if they were
praying to be accepted by their contradas, or praying to win. He looked
up at the painting above the altar and read the inscription beneath the
Virgin's feet. "O Holy Mother, be thou the fount of peace for Siena,
and be thou life for Duccio because he has painted you."

It was hard not to pray for yourself. If Duccio, the great painter,
could pray thus....

"O Holy Mother," Giorgio whispered, "be thou life for Gaudenzia." He
did not realize it was the mare he was praying for, and not himself, so
closely were they tuned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nine o'clock came. Time for the last Prova, the final rehearsal before
the Palio. The day was windless, the sky gray and cloudy, the track
still slippery from last night's rain. Giorgio resolved to take no
chances. From the start to the finish he held Gaudenzia almost to a
parade canter; he must save every tendon and muscle of her legs. She
finished in last place.

As he returned to his room, he wondered if he had done the right thing.
Had he been over cautious? Would the Onda approve? Or would they think
him lily-livered, not knowing how to ride?

Torn by gnawing anxiety he washed and combed while the guards stood
by waiting. In unaccustomed soberness they placed over his arm the
blue-and-white jacket of Onda, the very one he would wear in today's
Palio, and in his hand the steel helmet. Then as a body they marched
him to the Palazzo Pubblico, not into the vast courtyard where the
horses are gathered before the race, but into the formal and forbidding
Hall of the Magistrates. Here they vanished, and Captain Tortorelli
arose out of the gloom and indicated a chair for Giorgio beside him.
Other fantinos were already there, seated about a long table, jackets
over their arms, helmets in hand. And beside each was his captain.

The city officials now entered the solemnity of the room. The Mayor,
in gray-suited dignity, sat down at the head of the table, the starter
on his right, then the veterinarian and the Deputy of the Festival.
A lean-faced clerk with a pen behind his ear took his place on the
Mayor's left. He unrolled a great sheet of paper and laid it out before
him. The sheet was empty, except for a margin of tiny colored emblems
of all the contradas, and beside them, hair-thin lines waiting to be
filled in.

With a dry cough the clerk took the pen from behind his ear and held it
poised in midair like a hummingbird before it daggers into a flower.

Giorgio's heart quailed. He tried to stop the racing jumble of his
thoughts: last year's death of Turbolento, last night's dream. The
hoarfrost voice of the scribe cut off his thinking. Slowly the man
called the roll. Each fantino stood up as his contrada was called.
Carefully he held up his jacket with both hands so the emblem would
plainly show, and waited for his captain to confirm him. This done, the
clerk recorded the fantino's name in the big registry, writing with
long, even strokes and a flourish of his pen at the end.

When it was Giorgio's turn, his foot caught in the rung of his chair,
and it seemed an eternity before he could wrench free. To make matters
worse, his hands were shaking so violently that when he held up his
jacket the dolphin seemed mockingly alive, undulating through the blue
waves of the Onda.

It brought a faint titter from the other fantinos before Captain
Tortorelli broke in: "I hereby declare ..." he paused to clear his
throat. "I declare," he repeated, "_Giorgio Terni, fantino for the
Onda._"

Never to Giorgio had a man's gruff voice or the scratchy squeak
of a pen sounded so sweet. When it was all over, he went out into
the vastness of the Piazza. The pigeons were putting on an aerial
spectacle, spiralling into the deep sky. Giorgio felt his spirits rise
with them.

The Chief-of-the-Guards came up alongside. "I can see from your face,"
he smiled, "that all is now official."

Giorgio nodded.

"So you and your guards come rest at my house," the Chief said. "For
you my wife makes her special zucchini omelette. It sits light in your
stomach, and so you sit light on my Gaudenzia! You have now until four
o'clock to eat and rest and sip the sweet wine of anticipation."

Giorgio had not visited the eagle's-nest-of-a-house for a whole month,
not since the night of his arrival with Gaudenzia. Then, there had
been a yellow moon-path on the hillside. Now a watery sun was breaking
through the clouds, drawing moisture up in a thick curtain of mist.
Only a month, he thought, but leading up to it a whole calendar of
months from October to June. And before that, years of training for
Signor Ramalli; and before that, Bianca, the Blind One; and before
that, way in the beginning, a dusty little Umbrella Man sitting
crosslegged by the fountain, reciting the deep mystery of the Palio.

"Come inside! Come inside!" the Chief-of-the-Guards laughed. "Stop
gawping. Grapevines and olive groves you have seen before. Now we eat."

Giorgio was glad that no one expected him to eat much, or to talk at
all. After the meal Pinotto, Carlo, Enzio, and Nello took their siestas
in chairs and on the sofa. But Giorgio and the Chief paced--from
balcony to dining room to kitchen and back again.

The afternoon wore slowly on. From the distance came the murmur of
Tuscans and tourists pouring through the city's gates. The swelling
noise rolled into the house through doors and windows.

An hour is very long on Palio day, and Giorgio was never good at
waiting. The tick and the tock of the clock on the wall dawdled in
maddening slowness, the hands barely moving. Every few minutes he went
to the door to check the position of the sun, as if he could not trust
the clock. When at last the bodyguards stirred to life, relief flooded
through him. The waiting was over! It was time to dress for the pageant.

As Giorgio pulled on the blue-and-white striped stockings, the blue
buskins, the quilted velvet tunic with its plaited sleeves, and the
flowing wig, a curious thing happened to him. He was no longer Giorgio
Terni, the peasant boy of Monticello; he was a warrior, risen full-clad
from some ancient grave, ready and eager for battle.

When he arrived at the church of the Onda he saw that a change had come
over Gaudenzia, too. She appeared more dazzlingly white, taller, and
more elegant. She wore a spennacchiera of plumes in her headstall, and
she too was adorned in medieval splendor--a blue velvet bodycloth with
the dolphin embroidered almost life size in gold.

Before the arch of San Guiseppe the people stood aside. There was no
talk or whispering of any kind. Solemnly they made a corridor for her
and Giorgio to enter together. The mare must be blessed within the
church, for is not the Palio a religious celebration in honor of the
Visitation of the Virgin? Is not the blessing of the horse an age-old
custom? Then, open wide the doors! Throw out the carpet. Let her enter!

In the perfect stillness, Gaudenzia's hoofbeats are the measured
beat of time. Slowly she and Giorgio proceed up the aisle while the
congregation breathes a collective sigh at her beauty.

Book in hand, the priest greets them at the altar. "Almighty and
everlasting God," his resonant words roll out, "let this animal,
Gaudenzia, receive Thy blessing, whereby it may be preserved in body,
and freed from every harm by the intercession of the blessed Saint
Anthony, through Christ our Lord. Amen."

Whispered "Amens" ripple through the crowd like muffled drums as the
priest sprinkles holy water on Gaudenzia's head. The ceremony is over!
And all at once the silence explodes in a deafening burst of joy. The
clamoring rises to delirium.

Out in the street again, a tumultuous wave of humanity surrounds
Gaudenzia. People from all walks of life want to touch her, or even
the embroidery of her bodycloth. A man still wearing his shepherd's
smock wedges himself in close to Giorgio. His face breaks into a grin,
showing the dark hole where two of his teeth are missing. He points his
shepherd's crook at Gaudenzia. "_Magnifica!_" he laughs in rapture.

And the crowd takes up the cry. "_Magnifica!_"




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                     Have You Fear? Have You Fear?


Underneath his flowing wig, perspiration is streaking down Giorgio's
temples, and at the nape of his neck it trickles down and wets the
ruching of his collar. The great historical pageant is about to begin,
and he will be in it, and Gaudenzia will be in it. But she will walk
riderless, and he will ride a mighty warhorse clad in armor of steel.

Already his contrada is forming into a tight military company--the
drummer first, the two flag-bearers next with their enormous
blue-and-white flags, and then Captain Tortorelli in coat-of-mail with
unsheathed sword, and a major page and four minor pages. And then he,
Giorgio, will come on his warhorse, and last of all Gaudenzia, led by
her groom.

Giorgio's whole body is on tiptoe, on the brink of a great happening.
He can feel himself growing pale, the skin of his face drawing tight
over his cheekbones. A dark-bearded groom is offering his hand as a
mounting block, to help him climb aboard the huge warhorse.

Giorgio stiffens. If he can mount Gaudenzia bareback, he can certainly
put a foot into a stirrup and swing up without help. But the real
stiffening is a feeling he has, not exactly of jealousy, but of concern
that someone else is handling Gaudenzia. Will the man know how to
soothe, and be firm too, amidst the jostling of people and the throb of
drums, and the great race only a whisper of time away?

A nudge from the groom brings Giorgio up sharply. He waves the man
aside, puts the ball of his foot on the stirrup, swings into the
saddle. He feels awkward with a saddle between him and the horse--like
the times he straddled a chair when he was young, and made believe it
was a horse.

The groom thrusts a great iron lance into Giorgio's hand. "Hold it
firm!" he warns, as he anchors it in the socket of the stirrup.

"_Attenzione!_" The Captain booms his command. And now the whole
military company moves forward, the drum beating out in somber
vehemence. On both sides hundreds of people are moving with them in
swirling waves, upstream toward the highest hill of Siena. Where the
streets narrow, the people flatten themselves against the buildings,
then come forward again, like waters rushing, receding, rushing.

Giorgio sways along on his mount like a sailor on a flat-bottom boat.
The paddling gait of the warhorse is never in step with the beat of the
drum; it gives him a seasick feeling. Or is the churning in his stomach
a mixture of fear and joy? He glances back at Gaudenzia. She is jibbing
her head, actually lifting the groom off his feet as if he were a
puppet on a string. She too wants the race to start, and even now wants
Giorgio's hand on her leadstrap. He feels better then, in a shamefaced
way, and the seasickness leaves him.

His contrada is atop the hill now, moving past the ancient hospital
where nuns and patients are craning out the windows. Before the great
black-and-white Cathedral the company halts, and the flag-players fling
themselves into action, paying homage to the Archbishop in a window on
high. Bending, swaying, leaping over their banners, they toss their
flags skyward, making the blue waves on the white silk ripple and roar
like the waves of the sea.

On the wide steps of the Cathedral a great throng watches steadfast,
clapping in admiration. They stand with heads uncovered to the hot July
sun. Some have missed the intimate blessing within the church of their
own contrada, and have come to witness this final benediction for all.

Giorgio has passed this way before, once on the warhorse of the Shell,
once for the Panthers. But those other times were blurred. Then the
final benediction had not seemed a direct communion from the white
hand of the Archbishop way up there in the dark of the window. It had
not been direct to him, but a kind of general blessing for all the
contradas as they went by.

But now, on this day of July the second, 1954, Giorgio needs
benediction as truly as if Time had spun back, and the year were 1260,
and he was going into the Battle of Montaperti--or whatever the name
of that great battle was. Now he needs the strength that the white hand
up in the window can give him.

He stretches his neck, looking up, and he thinks of himself as a
parched bird, head back, beak open, begging a drop of water.

There! The hand is moving. Two fingers. No, three. They are making
the sign of the cross. The benediction is communion direct to him,
to Giorgio Terni, and it is coming right from God, with only the
Archbishop in between. Suddenly he is ready, calm and ready for battle,
and he nods a little to the figure up there in the window to let him
know he has received the message. His hand tightens on the lance.
He sways along on his broad-backed charger and leaves the Cathedral
Square; he and his whole company--the flag twirlers, and the Captain,
and Gaudenzia, and all the others--and they wind down from the hill,
and down, and down into the core of the city, a tight military company.

As they approach the entrance to the Piazza, the bell in the
Mangia Tower begins tolling a sonorous _bong, bong, bong_, and the
spine-tingling reverberations blot out all other sounds.

Before and behind are other companies. The contrada of Lupa is entering
Il Campo, and Onda will be next. Yes, he will be next. And he will be
really seeing the historical parade for the first time. Those other
times he had moved like one in sleep. But this is real. Now he knows
that the pageant is more than a parade; it is a bright fuse burning
itself around the shell of Il Campo until it blazes into the fire of
the Palio.

And at last, at last, he is riding into the square! His eyes blink at
the awesomeness. The facades of the palaces are alive with thousands
upon thousands of heads. And within the railing of the shell is a
heaving sea of heads, like flowers in a pot too small--rootbound and
gone riotous in bloom. And all those heads have bodies and souls,
and they have come to see him and to witness battle and bravery and
bloodshed; and he, Giorgio Terni, must fight off nine warriors before
his white mare can capture the golden banner.

He _has_ to do it because it is like keeping a promise to himself and
to those thousands of people. There are so many he dizzies trying to
separate them. And all those eyes are asking for the most beautiful
Palio in history, and Gaudenzia will give it to them!

The bigness of it all makes him afraid, and then he sees the small boys
who have been waiting in the sun since noon, sitting there on the white
posts that fence the shell. One looks up, focusing right at Giorgio
with his shiny, worshipful eyes, and Giorgio knows he wants to win for
him, and he wants to win for all the little _colonnini_, and for Emilio
back home in Monticello, and for little boys everywhere.

At thought of home a smile crosses his face, and even through the
bonging of the bell and the dinning of drums he can hear his mother
say: "Giorgio Terni! Tell me! Tell me! What contrada comes first? And
who next? And what happens then?"

He longs for a camera, but it would be no use. He has only two hands,
and one is frozen to the lance and the other guiding the reins on a
warhorse big as a battleship.

All right! He will be eyes and ears for everyone at home. His gaze
moving, he peers around, taking pictures in his mind, explaining.

"Mammina! Babbo! Teria! Emilio! I have a lofty perch on my warhorse.
I see across heads.... I see the whole procession. The members of the
parade are not the people of today, but what they look like--the people
of long ago.

"First come the red mace-bearers stumping along tall and straight, like
their maces. They make way for the black-and-white flag of Siena.

"Emilio, you should know this flag! It stands for Romulus, who founded
Rome, and for Remus, who founded Siena. Like us they were brothers,
only they were suckled not by a mamma, but by a she-wolf. One day those
brothers build fires, and the one fire makes white smoke and the other
black, and so the flag is for them ... black and white.

"Teria! You would like better the plumed knights and nobles in their
velvet costumes, and the musicians blowing on their silver trumpets.

"And Babbo! The magistrates of the guilds _you_ would like--the silk
workers, and wool workers, and stone and gold workers, and builders,
and painters, and blacksmiths, and apothecaries."

Giorgio's eyes sharpen, dart ahead with the unbroken cavalcade as it
winds triumphantly around the Piazza. How can he remember it all? How
can he possibly make his family see those flag-players tossing their
great flags into the air, making them soar in a hundred ways? "Oh,
Mamma mia, look. Look, right now! Our boys from the Onda are doing the
jump of the snowflake. Look how they leap high in the air, making the
great banners unfurl, _horizontal_!

"Oh, I give up! Some day you must come. Those boys--they send their
souls up with their flags into the sky. You _got_ to see it. Yourself!"

Giorgio stops a moment, tired, bewildered. His brain goes blank with
taking pictures, as if he has run out of film. He squirms in his
saddle, forces himself on.

"Yes! All this you got to see." He tries to pick one last scene
to remember, and his eyes light on the very young page boys linked
shoulder-to-shoulder by green garlands. "Look, Emilio, they are no
bigger than you yourself. See how they separate the ten contradas who
will run from the seven who will not! And, Babbo, you would laugh
how much those little boys with their loops of green look like the
grapevines between our fields."

Giorgio stopped. He was out of breath. A hush had fallen over Il
Campo as the parade came to an end. From the tail of his eye he saw
the magnificent gold _carroccio_ winding up the procession. Was this
battlecar the same one as last year, and last century? He knew,
of course, that it must be, but today he saw afresh the brilliant
paintings on its sides, the gilded wheels, the resplendent Palio held
aloft--the banner he and Gaudenzia must bring to Onda.

The hush deepened. The rolling of the drums stopped. The bonging of the
bell seemed far away in the sky, but within the battlecar the silver
trumpets were weaving a dialogue, the high notes calling, the low ones
answering.

Giorgio straightened in his saddle. To him the high notes were not a
summons, but a question--insistent, unvaried, probing over and over and
over again:

"_Have you fear? Have you fear?_"

And the silver-blown answer piercing the air:

"_Courage is the law of the Palio._"




                              CHAPTER XXV

                          Behold, the Palio!


Seven o'clock. Time spinning itself out. Time throwing its shadows up
and up the tower. Excitement mounting with the shadows. The knights
and nobles, having completed the turn of the track, seat themselves on
the benches in front of the Palazzo. The rich colors of their costumes
make a dazzling design, like jewels in a crown--rubies and emeralds,
sapphires and amethysts.

With the other fantinos Giorgio guides his charger into the big
courtyard of the Palazzo. He takes a quick look back. The track is
empty now except for the flag twirlers of all the contradas. His eyes
are glued to them. They look like gnomes playing with sheets of fire,
flinging their furled staffs thirty feet into the air until each one
bursts in a blaze of crackling color.

Before he has looked enough, the groom prods him along. "Come! Do you
forget the race?"

Within the high-vaulted court all is disciplined order. Ten pages are
leading the war chargers away. Ten grooms are tying their race horses
to iron rings around the walls. Ten fantinos, with the help of their
costume boys, are changing clothes--from suede buskins to rubber-soled
shoes, from velvet tunics to cotton jackets, from plumed headgear to
steel helmets. Giorgio runs his finger inside the rim of his helmet.
Yes! It has been padded to fit. He sees that his hands are trembling.
He wipes their dampness on a rag which the groom tosses him. He casts
sidelong glances at the other fantinos. Ivan-the-Terrible glares at
him, carrying on the feud from last year.

The starter picks up his megaphone, barks out rules and warnings:
"_Attenzione!_ It is permissible to ward off your enemy with the nerbo,
but never grasp the bridle of an enemy horse. The eyes of the world are
upon you. Represent well the spirit of Siena, and of your contrada. Be
brave!"

Only a few minutes to go. The barbaresco of Onda carries out his final
duties--checks the bridle of Gaudenzia, her cheek-strap, her chinstrap,
her reins; last of all her spennacchiera ... is it anchored solidly in
case her fantino should fall? He dips his hands in a basin of water and
solemnly, as if he were performing a sacred rite, uses the flat of his
hands to wet the mare's withers, her back, her barrel, her flanks.

"Giorgio--" His voice sounds winded, like a run-out dog. He tries
again. "Giorgio, I have made her coat damp. It will help you stick on.
Now, run the best race of your life." He unties her from the iron ring.
"Here, she is yours. I have done all I can. _Now rules Fate, the Queen
of the Palio._"

Giorgio takes the reins and studies the mare from pricked ears to tail.
Her neck is frosted with foam, her nostrils distended, her eyes darkly
intent. He does not answer the groom. He has just himself to answer.
"No! No! _Not Fate!_"

Only a few seconds to go.

A squad of guards marches in, surrounds the starter to escort him to
his box beneath the judges' scaffold. The man walks out slowly, his
face showing worry; he knows full well that if he releases the starting
rope an instant too late, ten horses may fall, and his own life be
threatened by angry throngs.

The Chief-of-the-Town-Guards takes his post at the entrance of the
Palazzo. In one hand he holds a white flag, in the other, ten nerbos.
He looks out into the square, watches the starter mount his box,
watches the ragno, the little spider-man, climb up to his cage, ready
to touch off the gunpowder. He turns his head back to the courtyard.
The horses and fantinos are ready.

Now! He lifts the white flag, waving it on high to alert the ragno.
Bang! The air quivers as the bomb bursts in a deafening percussion.
It is the signal for the fantinos to ride out. The roaring in the
amphitheater stops as if cut off by a sharp knife. The silence is full
of mystery, almost of pain. Then sixty thousand throats cry out:

"_A cavallo! A cavallo!_ To horse! To horse!"

As each jockey in turn rides out, the Chief presents him with the
nerbo. Instinctively, the horses who have been in a Palio before shy in
fright.

Giorgio's breath catches in his throat. His right hand, still tingling
from gripping the lance, now accepts the nerbo from the firm hands of
the Chief. "Will I have to use it?" he asks himself.

Out from the maw of the courtyard the cavalcade moves forward toward
the starting rope. Through his legs and thighs he can feel the mare's
heart pounding against him. He hears the starter call out the horses in
order. He prays for first position--or last.

"Number one, Lupa, the Wolf!" A thunder of applause goes up, boos and
cheers mingling.

"Number two, the Tower!

"Aquila, the Eagle, number three!

"Tartuca, the Turtle, four!"

As they are called, the horses prance up, take their positions between
the ropes. Eagle and Wolf are jumpy, move about, change positions. The
starter sternly sends all four horses back, recalls them again one by
one, then goes on:

"Number five, Drago, the Dragon!

"Number six, Civetta, the Owl!

"Montone, the Ram, seven!"

The whistles and the shouts are strong. "Up with Montone! Up with
Montone! Up with Ivan!"

"Istrice, the Porcupine, eight!

"Giraffa, nine!"

The nine wait tensely for the final call. Giorgio tries to conceal his
joy. He will be number ten! He knows the rules, revels in them. The
number ten horse starts behind the others. With a rush she will come
up to the rope and trigger the race.

The starter raises his megaphone. His voice shrills: "Number ten, Onda!
Come on!"

Giorgio's heart beats with a wild gladness. Now it is! The time for
action! He lifts Gaudenzia's head; she leaps forward. The rope drops at
the split instant she touches it. It rolls free, coiling up on itself,
almost onto her pasterns. As it falls to the track, ten horses are off
like gunshot, Gaudenzia in the lead!

With Montone hot on her heels, she travels fast in spite of the sticky
track. Landmarks spin by--the Fonte Gaia, the casino of the nobles, the
palaces of Saracini and Sansedoni. Giorgio sucks in all the air his
lungs can hold. Ahead lies the sharp right-angle turn of San Martino,
the waiting ambulance in plain sight.

From bleachers, from balconies, from all over the Piazza Gaudenzia's
enemies are shrieking for blood. In full stride she goes up the
incline. A moment of terror! She stumbles, breaks gait. Ivan, for
Montone, tries to crowd her into the posts. But Giorgio grasps her
mane, squeezes his right leg into her flanks. Squeezes tighter. It
works! She recovers; she's safe!

"Bravo.... Bravissimo!" The crowd is crazed with emotion.

Only the red jacket of Montone is anywhere near as Gaudenzia flies
along the straightaway to the narrows of the Casato, and uphill for the
strangles of that curve. Using her tail as a rudder, she veers around
the curve, gallops down the stretch to pass the starter's box, still
holding the lead.

The blood sings in Giorgio's ears. He clucks to Gaudenzia for the
second lap, forgets he has a nerbo. The piston legs of Montone pound
on relentlessly, press forward, gain on her at the fountain, gain
going around San Martino. Almost to the Casato again, Giorgio tenses,
deliberately cuts in front of Ivan. He has to, to get to the rail, to
shorten the distance! This is battle! All in a split second Ivan's
horse is forced to prop, to brake. In turn Lupa is blocked; she
swerves, careens, hurtles to the ground, dragging the oncoming Giraffa
and Tartuca with her. The track is a mad scramble of horses and riders!
Gaudenzia for Onda is still streaking on.

"_Forza! Forza!_" the voices shriek. "Give it to us, Giorgio! Give us
the Palio!"

And around for the third time she battles Montone, who is making one
last desperate effort to catch up. But he is no match for Gaudenzia.
Not weaving, not wobbling, moving at a terrific pace, she goes the
whole lap. As she flashes by the flag of arrival, Giorgio wildly waves
his nerbo in victory. He has not used it before!

With roars of triumph, the Onda victors spill out upon the track, hug
their hero, lift him up, carry him on their shoulders. Angry losers
close in, to pinch and pull and buffet him. A corps of howling, happy
men of Onda try to force them back, but it is the Chief-of-the-Guards
who succeeds. He makes himself a one-man shield and his voice bellows
like a bull. "Lift him high! _Higher!_" he commands. "Before they
murder him!" Then, eyes brimming in pride, he salutes Giorgio on both
cheeks, and kisses his white mare full on the mouth.

The cart horse of Casalino has won the 536th running of the Palio.




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                         Victor of the Piazza


It was a moment that moved the Sienese to weeping. Giorgio had never
been so confused in his life; nor so happy. Here were life and
glory, past and present, all in one! Up in the judges' box Captain
Tortorelli was lifting the golden Palio from its socket, reaching
over the railing, placing the staff in the outstretched hands of a
knight from the Onda. The crowd surged toward the victory banner,
then back to Giorgio as the living symbol of it. They smothered him
with embraces--young men, old men, young girls, old women--frenziedly
showering him with their joy. Around the square they carried him aloft
on strong shoulders, first to the church to show the Palio to the
image of the Virgin, then on through the streets of Siena, cheering,
shouting, laughing, singing.

The little narrow alleys were packed so tight they could scarce contain
the winding human river. From balconies women and children tossed red
carnations to Giorgio. Catching them he thought, "These would be nice
to decorate Gaudenzia's bridle. I hope she is safe from the crowd." He
tried to get a glimpse of her, but she was lost in the maelstrom.

Up and down the wavy streets of Onda the growing throng marched,
four abreast, six abreast, eight abreast. Young people from friendly
contradas joined them. Together they invaded enemy quarters, singing
their victory song, drums throbbing, hearts throbbing, flags
fluttering. In enemy territory the shouts of joy were speared by
catcalls. Street fighting flared up in dark doorways; old people wept
tears of bitterness. But the drums never ceased, nor the singing.

A wave of pleasant tiredness washed over Giorgio. He was a piece of
drift, tossed hither and yon by the seething mob as it spilled out from
the canyon of walls, and overflowed into the tiny green of Lizza Park.
Then all the way back down into the city again, and into the streets of
the Onda.

The contrada had become a whirlpool, drawing into it friends and
strangers alike. Candles twinkled like a constellation of stars. Meat,
bread, watermelons, and wine appeared by magic. Bands played in the
streets. Dancers swooped Giorgio into their arms. Men and women both
twirled him about like a pinwheel. He ate. He drank the ceremonial
wine. All night long the celebration went on, with Gaudenzia making
grand appearances, her plumes nodding, her hoofs painted with gold.

At last, when the candles were guttering and the morning stars
beginning to wink out, Giorgio's bodyguards rescued him and took him to
his room to sleep.

Safe in his cool bed, Giorgio wanted nothing but to lie quiet in the
gray darkness and live it all over again. With his eyes closed, he saw
the figure of Gaudenzia rise up before him. "Look at you!" he spoke
to her. "In your yesterdays you were just a poor work horse, pulling
the rickety cart. Today you are ... you are...." He tried to fight off
sleep, to savor the deliciousness of victory, but his very bones seemed
to melt into the mattress, and the shutters of his mind closed.

At eight o'clock on the morning of July third, General Barbarulli was
already in the heart of the city, waiting for the news-stand to open
up for business. The morning papers had just arrived, and the ancient
vendor, an Ondaese, was flinging the rope-bound stacks up on the
counter as if he were still giving vent to his joy. When the ropes were
cut and everything was in order, he leaned toward the General, honored
to have him as the first customer. "Which paper is it you would like?"

"Three of each," was the smiling reply. "One set is for the museum of
Onda, one is for myself, and one for our fantino."

The transaction completed, the General stepped around the corner and
went inside the post office to be less conspicuous in his enjoyment
of the accounts of yesterday's victory. He stood in the light of the
stained glass window and opened up the first paper. As he read, he had
to hold it quite high to let his tears of happy pride fall unseen.
He read all three journals, then left hurriedly to share the glowing
reports with his fantino.

Giorgio was so deep in sleep that it took insistent knocking on his
door to arouse him. The bodyguards, exhausted from the celebration,
still lay bundled in their sheets, snoring softly. Giorgio quickly
pulled on his shirt and trousers and stepped out into the hallway.

"My boy," the General smiled broadly, "you have a new name!" Tapping
Giorgio lightly on the shoulder with the newspapers, he spoke in
staccato excitement. "Read! Read, now! These stories you will want to
send home to Monticello." He spread out the front pages of each paper
on the hall table and stood waiting to see the effect they would have.

Giorgio read slowly, struggling over some of the longer words.
"The fantino of the Onda," the first article said, "who last year
found difficulty in securing a mount, this year has won everlasting
recognition from the people of the Onda, who carried him aloft in
triumph. The Palio, in the midst of a sea of flags, has already made
its entrance into the museum of the contrada. The little hero of the
Piazza...." He blushed, embarrassed to go on.

"Read more--read more," the General urged. "The Palio has christened
you! You have a new name. Look! See for yourself."

Giorgio read faster now, skimming as best he could. What was wrong with
the name he had? What was wrong with Giorgio Terni? The second paper
said nothing about a name. He turned to the third and read, "Young
Giorgio Terni, peasant boy from the Maremma, is now crowned with a new
name. Sienese everywhere speak of him as _Vittorino_, the little victor
of the Piazza."

Giorgio's heart quickened. Maybe some people would call "Vittorino" a
nickname, he thought, but to me it seems a very nice title.

"The battle was not as fierce as expected," the article went on.
"The fantinos did not use their nerbos, for Gaudenzia was first from
beginning to end. The masterful performance of horse and rider together
has given the youngest fantino in the Palio his new name. Henceforth he
will be known as Vittorino."

"Vit-to-ri-no!" the boy tasted it on his tongue.

General Barbarulli beamed. "It pleases you? No?"

"Si, si! It is better than _Professore_ or _Dottore_ or even ..." the
boy reddened.

"Better even than _Generale_?" the General's eyes twinkled. "I agree!
It is a beautiful laurel, invisible, to wear with honor and pride. And
now we have many weeks for rejoicing." He sighed happily as he folded
his own newspapers. "Then in September, when nights are cool, we will
hold our Victory Dinner right in the middle of Via Giovanni Du Pré.
A thousand places will be set under the stars, and Gaudenzia will be
the guest of honor. At the head table she will be served! And you,
Vittorino, can feast your eyes and your stomach without even making a
speech. It will be your and Gaudenzia's grand triumph. Now, then, I
have much to see about and must be on my way."

He shook hands briskly, turned on his heel, and went lightly down the
stairs.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                            A Time to Seek


The next weeks that should have been all gay and rejoicing for a hero
of the Piazza turned dark with worry. It concerned Gaudenzia, and yet
it didn't concern her. The August Palio was less than six weeks away,
but already Giorgio felt troubled by a thing he did not understand.
Suppose another fantino should ride her then, and he would have to
fight against her!

He tried to argue with himself. "Look here, Giorgio, in your pocket you
have some money. In the streets children salute you with flags. In the
Palazzo Pubblico men treat you man-sized. And every day you receive
poems, presents, and pictures. Yet you are not happy."

Deliberately he turned all his attention on the mare. He would keep
her stall cleaner than a kitchen, and her mantle spotless. And if he
worked on a new training program for her, he might be too busy to worry.

This time he did not bother with a calendar. He had only to ease her
off from the pinnacle of July second, then build her right back up
again.

The Chief-of-the-Guards was too happy to notice how silent Giorgio had
grown. He lived in a state of blissful pride, for Gaudenzia seemed in
no way weakened by racing on the treacherous course.

"If anything, she is now more strong," he said time and again. "Legs
firm and trim. No puffy swellings around the joints. No cuts from
overreaching or crossfiring. And no bruising or splitting of her hoofs.
As for the corners of her mouth, they are soft like a young filly's.
Who could recognize her as the sad bag-of-bones we rescued from the
sausage maker. Eh, son?"

The Chief was aware that other contradas would now want the famous
Vittorino to ride for them, but his contrada, Nicchio, had asked first.
He refused to think that in the next battle the boy might have to ride
another horse and so fight against Gaudenzia. Surely, whoever drew
Gaudenzia would buy Giorgio from the Nicchio.

Giorgio, however, did not have this assurance. And whenever he tried to
voice his fears, the Chief seemed so happy that the words died unspoken.

But if the boy had grown broody and silent, Gaudenzia was just the
opposite. She felt intensely alive. Let out of her stable, she tried
to rake the sky for sheer joy in living. She felt good! Never was she
alone, not even on rainy days; her fantino was groom and companion,
too, steadfast as the earth. And so she thrived.

From fast work she went to slower and longer work. She walked and
trotted one week, two weeks. Then gradually Giorgio intensified her
training. More trotting and galloping, less walking. More grain, less
hay.

"For you, your life will always be mountains and valleys," he told
her one morning as they jogged along a country byway. "Always between
Palios comes the easing off, the nice rest. Then you must start all
over again and make the steep climb to new peaks."

A fluffy seed blew into her nose. She blew it out again with a loud
snort.

"Yes, you can snort away your little troubles. But me?" Sighing, he ran
his eye along the distance, along the tufted terraces of olive gardens,
and he followed the aerial maneuvers of a pair of swallows snapping
insects on the wing. By keeping his mind busy he hoped to wear blinders
to what was bothering him. But it was no use. The worry kept eating at
his heart. Maybe he would feel better if he put it into words, instead
of letting it run around in his head like a mouse in a mill.

"Listen, Gaudenzia," he spoke into the fine pricked ears, "for one
little month you are Queen of the Palio. But you won your crown
without...."

His talk sounded silly against the shimmer of distance. He clucked to
the mare. A faster pace might make the words come faster, easier.

He tried again to make his voice strong, to empty his thoughts.
"Gaudenzia! You won the July Palio without real battle, without the
nerbo, without the secret arrangements." The words flowed faster. "Now
you are marked. You are the one to beat. You and I--in the next Palio
we could be separated. The contrada which draws you could already have
engaged some other fantino." He burst out shouting: "What if you have
to be beaten and slashed back? By me!"

The sweat broke cold on his face. He pulled the mare to a halt, and she
stood trembling at his tone as if already she were beaten over the head
with his nerbo. Thinking of her nervous tic, he quickly dismounted and
quieted her.

       *       *       *       *       *

July passed. Giorgio had no peace. His dream of the Palio had become
sullied. He called on the Chief-of-the-Guards in his own home. He
called on General Barbarulli. He sought out Signor Ramalli. With each
he tried to unburden his worry, but the talk was roundabout and never
came near the sore spot.

In desperation, one day, he put Gaudenzia in the care of a barbaresco
and went home to Monticello. He planned to arrive in the late
afternoon, when he knew his mother would be cooking supper. She would
be standing in the pool of light from the single bulb over the stove,
and her back would be toward him, and the room would be steamy warm,
and in the semi-darkness it would be easy to speak right out.

It happened exactly like that. Giorgio was there in the kitchen,
leaning against the wall where the patched green umbrella hung, and
both cats were sidling up against his legs as if they remembered him
from yesterday, and he was saying, "Mamma, now that I am grown, the
Palio is a thing I do not understand."

His mother was making pizzas, shaping each pie carefully. She stood
there in her black dress and did not turn around. And yet Giorgio felt
her motherliness spread over him like wings over a young bird.

"Giorgio," she began, then corrected herself. "My boy is now Vittorino.
He has the wished-for name, and in his keeping he has the wished-for
mare. Yet he does not understand the workings of the Palio, and so he
is unhappy."

"That is the way of it, Mamma."

"You are not alone in this, Vittorino. Many things of history _I_ do
not understand. Nor does your Babbo. But the part that torments you,
maybe it is a thing to pull out of the dark and into the light. Maybe
then...."

She stopped short, choosing silence for urging the boy on.

Giorgio blurted out: "Mamma! It is the secret arrangements between
the contradas. The Palio is a religious festival. Is it right, do you
think, to hold your horse back, to make her lose? What if"--the words
came tight and strained--"what if for Gaudenzia another fantino should
be chosen? And I should have to strike her?"

The shaping of the pies went on in silence.

"I had to ask it! Everyone in Onda is happy. And the Chief is happy.
And Gaudenzia is happy. But I, I am sad! Some nights, for hours I do
not sleep. How can I be a fantino so soon again if in my heart there is
a heaviness? How can I?"

The mother sighed deeply. Why is it, she thought, that always children
have questions like knots which they throw into the lap of the mother?
Little children, little knots; big children, big knots. Always it is
so. She thought a long time and the room grew so still that the whir of
a hummingbird at a flower in the window sounded big and loud.

"I think there is someone," she said at last, "who could ease your
burden."

Giorgio was hearing with every fiber. "Tell me! Who is it?"

The mother seemed to be talking to herself, convincing herself. "Yes!
He would be the one; he is wise in the mysteries that trouble the
heart."

"Who, Mamma?"

"He is a thoughtful, listening man."

"But who _is_ he?"

"He knows especially boys; he believes they deserve to be heard."

"But _who_?" It was a cry for help.

"His name," the mother said with a little glow of wonder, "his name is
Monsignor Tardini."

"Monsignor Tardini!"

"Si."

"Why, he is a great man at the Vatican. He stands next to the Pope
himself!"

The mother went to the cupboard and took out plates and cups to set the
table. "Soon now the pizzas will be done," she said, "and Babbo and the
children will come from the farm, and we eat."

"But why does the Monsignore understand especially boys?"

"Because, in a pine grove on the skirts of Rome, there sits a beautiful
villa for orphans. It is called Villa Nazareth, and Monsignor Tardini,
he is the guiding spirit. Even the grown boys, after they go out into
the world, bring their troubles to him."

"But, Mamma, how do you know all this?"

"I know because young Arturo, a boy from the Maremma, is there. _He_
says so."

"You mean I should go all the way to Rome? To the Vatican?"

The mother nodded. "You should go, even if it costs dear. In the sugar
bowl there is money. Yours and Gaudenzia's," she smiled, "from the
victory of Onda." She stopped to pinch off a few faded flowers from
the pots in the window. Then she went back to the stove. "There comes
a time," she said, turning to look right at Giorgio, "when to make a
pilgrimage is necessary for peace of the mind."

A far look crept into the boy's eyes. Suddenly he burned with the urge
to go to Rome.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                        All Roads Lead to Rome


Two days later, back in Siena, Giorgio dressed at dawn and went to say
good-bye to Gaudenzia. She gazed steadfastly at him as if he had made
the morning sunbeams slant westward for the day, as if he had made the
grain she ate, and the air she breathed. "Do not have fear," he told
her. "I return _presto, pronto, subito_. I return this night."

Already he felt better. The mere prospect that today he could unburden
his worries was like strength in his blood. He filled Gaudenzia's
hayrack and water pail. He stripped her stall of bedding and swept the
floor. He brought in sheaves of bright straw and shook them and padded
them and banked them around the walls.

A friendly groom came in as he was putting the fork away. The man was
big and brawny with sad, red-rimmed eyes like a hound dog's. He clapped
Giorgio on the back.

"_Ah, Roma! Bella, bella Roma!_" he sighed, rolling his eyes heavenward
and kissing his fingertips. "My favorite of cities! You will see the
catacombs and the Colosseum and the Castle of San Angelo. But why," he
puzzled, "do you go _now_ when the manifestation of the Palio already
makes the air crackle?"

"I cannot explain. I must hurry. Soon my train leaves. Please, Signore,
kindly do me the favor to look in on Gaudenzia twice before nightfall."

       *       *       *       *       *

The seven o'clock train chugged out of the station at the exact stroke
of seven. Giorgio, his hair combed so carefully the teeth marks showed,
sat in a second-class compartment filled with soldiers sleeping. They
paid him less attention than if he had been a fly. He was glad. He
could read again the exciting note in his pocket.

"The Right Reverend Monsignor Tardini," it said, "will see you at
the Vatican at twelve-thirty on Thursday next." And it was signed,
"Angelina Ciambellotti, leader of work with children, Siena."

Having nothing to do, he read the few words again and admired the
signature of this woman he hardly knew. The pen strokes were strong
and sure. Did she ever worry about things, he wondered; or was her
path laid out straight as a piece of string? Maybe working for orphans
as she and the Monsignore did was like holding a compass in the hand;
always you knew the way. He folded the letter and put it back in his
pocket, alongside the light race shoe of Gaudenzia which he was taking
as a gift for the Monsignore. His fingers closed about it for comfort.

The soldiers were still sleeping, grunting and twitching as if they
fought imaginary battles. Giorgio wished he could sleep, too, but he
had never before been to Rome and he might miss the junction at Chiusi
where he had to change to an express. When he finally reached it he was
in a panic for fear he would get on the wrong train. He asked a dozen
people to make sure.

"You have much time," they laughed. "Why not have a coffee?"

Remembering now that he had forgotten to eat breakfast, he gulped a
tiny cup of coffee and bought a sugared roll. When at last the express
to Rome roared into the station, he crowded in with the others and
found a seat beside a gangling American student.

The rest of the trip was a succession of dark tunnels and hairpin
curves, of haystacks and strawstacks, and boys herding sheep, and oxen
pulling plows between rows of grain.

Calmer now, Giorgio leaned back against the high cane seat. The train
went no farther than Rome, so he closed his eyes and let the flowing
countryside and the warm August air lull him to sleep.

It was the young American who, tugging at Giorgio's sleeve, woke him
up. "All roads lead to Rome!" he said in Italian with a strong American
accent. "We are here!"

Giorgio thanked him and burst out of the train. He hadn't meant to
sleep. Suppose he had overslept and missed his appointment with the
Monsignore! He ran through the station, skirting a big bed of pansies,
darting his way through the surge of people, past the food and drink
vendors, past porters trundling mountains of baggage. Out in the street
he stopped a policeman.

"The Vatican!" he gasped. "Monsignor Tardini, he awaits me!"

The policeman smiled, then laughed. "Is it _urgente_?"

"Si, si! _Urgente!_"

The white-gloved hand made a wide circle in the air. "My boy," he
bowed, "to go by carriage is best. Then the sights you see, and quickly
you get there, too."

Nearby, the driver of a carriage, a sparrowy man with a tall hat,
dropped his newspaper and was at Giorgio's side in an instant. "For one
thousand lire I take you to the Vatican," he offered.

"One thousand lire!"

Suddenly the driver saw in the young boy a pilgrim come to the Holy
City, a boy all alone with trouble. A strange resemblance to his
own grandson made him say, "Jump up! You sit here beside me. We fly
together." He waved Giorgio onto the high front seat, slapped the lines
over the rump of a bony mare, cracked his whip, and the cart took off
with Giorgio sitting alongside the grinning driver.

Up and down the streets of the great city the gaunt creature clattered
at a lively pace. The time clock in her head told her it was almost
time for the nosebag. The sooner she delivered her passenger, the
sooner she could plunge her muzzle into a bagful of cut-up greens.
Onlookers laughed and cheered them on as if they were in a race.
Nearing St. Peter's Square, the driver tried to pull her down to a
sedate walk, but she was no respecter of religion. And so, lathered and
blowing, she swung at break-neck speed through the gates of the Holy
City.

The wide piazza of St. Peter's with its obelisk and gushing fountains
was alive with movement--nuns sailing in their starchy wimples, priests
billowing in black robes, sailors and soldiers and pilgrims from
everywhere clicking cameras, feeding the pigeons, gazing up at the
great dome of the church.

The driver pulled up in front of the basilica. He shook hands with
Giorgio as with an old friend. "Boy," he directed, "that way you go!
No, not up the center to the church. To the right wing! Up the steps
and through the bronze portal. To you I wish best luck; and now,
_arrivederci_, my son."

Inside the grilled door two Swiss Guards, resplendent in striped
livery, blocked Giorgio's entrance with their halberds.

"I--I--" Giorgio stuttered miserably. He was no longer Vittorino,
the brave fantino who had won the July Palio. He was only Giorgio,
shrinking in size, getting littler and littler until once again he was
the runt of Monticello. Suddenly he thought of the letter in his pocket
and presented it to the imposing guard, wrong side up.

Unsmiling, the man turned it around, read the single sentence
carefully, and with a formal nod motioned him inside the Papal palace.

Afterward Giorgio never remembered how many footmen in gray and how
many officials in black and how many Palatine guards read the letter
and said, "Come this way," or "Go that way." Nor did he remember how
many frescoed passages he walked, nor how many glass-enclosed elevators
he rode, nor how many grand staircases and minor staircases he climbed.
He moved as one in a dream, through marble halls, and around and
around, and up and up and up, until he found himself in a magnificent
courtyard open to the sky. He crossed its immensity, feeling antlike
beside the gigantic statues of the apostles towering above him. Then he
was ushered into an empty chamber that seemed a trinket in size, yet
was more beautiful than any he had ever known.

"You may be seated," the guide said, and disappeared.

Perching gingerly on the edge of a settee, Giorgio felt less secure
than if he were riding bareback on a runaway horse. He mopped his brow
and folded his handkerchief. He looked about him. The room was all red
and gold. The gold chairs were covered in a rosy red, like the colors
worn by the Ram in the Palio. And the walls were the same rosy red.

Everything was quiet. Occasional wisps of conversation drifted in, but
these only emphasized the stillness. For a moment he wanted to bolt. He
knew now how Gaudenzia felt when left all alone, with no familiar hands
or voice.

And just when the silence grew terrifying, a young clerk beckoned him
across the hall and into a room with half-closed shutters. It was
pleasantly dark and cool. "The Monsignore will see you now," the young
man said.

And there, coming to meet Giorgio, was Monsignor Domenico Tardini,
Pro-secretary of State for Extraordinary Affairs.

Giorgio looked up at him, tongue-tied. The face was all faces in
one--kindly and penetrating, old and very young, smiling and
stern--and the eyes, dark and deep-set behind the thick glasses, were
both fiery and serene.

Seeing the worry in Giorgio's face, the Monsignore waved him kindly to
a row of chairs against the wall, and he himself pulled one out and sat
facing the boy.

"I congratulate you," he began with a gentle smile. "Signora
Ciambellotti has informed me about you. It is a happy occasion to
salute a new star of the Palio."

Giorgio could not answer; he only gulped.

The Monsignore went on, talking more to himself than to the boy.
"Vittorino," he spoke the name slowly, elegantly, precisely. "'Victory
of the Small One,' it means. I have many boys at Villa Nazareth who
look upon you as their hero. To ride in the Palio is to them like
riding through the gates of heaven.

"Now," he said, running his hands through his short-cropped hair, "I am
truly glad you came. You see, today there are affairs of state which
prevent me from going out to visit those boys. But you have come to
see me in their stead. Even in their sheltered life they have many
problems. Do you, too, have a problem?"

"Monsignore?"

"Yes, my son."

Giorgio plunged one hand into his pocket and his fingers clutched the
thin horseshoe. "Do you have enough time for me? With affairs of state
and all?"

"As much as you need. You see," he smiled, "I am in charge of
extraordinary affairs, and this just might be an extraordinary affair."

"It is!" Giorgio sat up straighter, and suddenly the flood-gates
opened. "Monsignore! In the Palio of August the Contrada of Nicchio
might not draw Gaudenzia."

"And why is it you wish Nicchio to draw her?"

"Because they asked me last year to ride for them."

"Then why did you ride for Onda in July?"

"Because then Nicchio was one of the seven contradas that did not run."

"Ah, yes. Of course. So it is one chance in ten that your mare should
be assigned to Nicchio?"

The boy nodded. And again his questions flew like arrows to a target.
"Monsignore! the Palio is a religious festival. Why then is it right
for the captains to make the secret agreements? Why is it right for the
fantinos to help other horses win and hold back their own? Why is it?"

The voices out in the halls faded away. The room seemed to contract.
There were just the two of them--the man thinking, and the boy with the
eager hope in him, sitting ... watching ... waiting out his answer.

"It is an honest question, Vittorino"--the words came slowly--"and only
half the answer do I know."

"Yes?"

"Suppose we turn back some pages into history. Suppose we remember that
before the year 1721 all seventeen contradas were allowed to race. Is
not that true?"

"Si, si."

"The course is very narrow, is it not, Giorgio?"

"Si."

"When all seventeen raced, how was the departure from the starting
rope?"

"Monsignore! How could they all get away at once?"

"They couldn't! Some fell and were trampled. So now the contradas draw
lots for the honor of competing, and only ten horses run. Is not that
better for the horse?"

"Oh, si."

"And the people do not wager any money on the race. That is good, no?"

Giorgio nodded, wishing the Monsignore would get to the core.

"And now mattresses are placed upright about the dangerous curves to
protect horses and fantinos both. Is that not better than in days of
old when heads of man and beast cracked against the walls?"

"Si!"

"And the contrada that wins makes nothing, but spends much. Is not that
so?"

"It is."

"And at their banquets the rich and the poor, the rulers and the
workers sit at table in happy contact, and no one feels diminished or
humiliated. Is it not good?"

"It is."

"But if a contrada draws a poor horse, then it can try to help a
friendly contrada? Is that so?"

Giorgio winced. "That is the part! That is it! What if I have to hinder
Gaudenzia? She will not understand. A whole year now she trusts in me.
On her open cuts I put salt and alum. Under her belly she lets me walk
to sew her blanket in place. It is me who nursed and trained her."

The Monsignore knew he had touched the sore spot. He tried to put
himself in the boy's place. "Can you get along without being a fantino?
Can you live without taking part in this Palio, and the next, and...."

"No, no, Monsignore," Giorgio interrupted. "Ever since I was a little
boy, there is no other world for me."

"Then, my son, what your captain tells you to do, that you must do.
The Palio is war. Contradas form alliances as countries do, to help
each other fight a common enemy."

Giorgio sat silent at the desolating words.

"But of course"--the Monsignore took off his spectacles, and now
he spoke eagerly, earnestly--"the unforeseen can happen! Have you
forgotten," he asked, "the grand element of uncertainty? The horse
knows nothing of the clouds of intrigue gathering while he eats happily
his grain. He knows only that he is the servant of man, who sometimes
betrays him."

The Monsignore had not finished. His gaze went past the boy's head,
through the walls and beyond. "Perhaps that is why the humble St.
Francis of Assisi wished to be Protector to Animals."

His eyes then came back to Giorgio and flashed warmly. "As fantino, you
must know that the probability of winning the Palio is based on the
speed of the horse, the skill of the fantino, and the diplomacy of the
captain. But it cannot be said that even with all these favorable, the
victory is secure. Man tries to fix and arrange, but ah, the horse ...
he knows only the one law, and that is to win. It is the most beautiful
and bittersweet lesson of the Palio."

A young clerk came into the room and placed a sheaf of papers on the
desk. Giorgio sensed that affairs of state were piling up.

"It is not a whole answer, my son," the Monsignore concluded, "but it
is the best I can do."

Giorgio stood up to go. Already he began to breathe more easily, as
if something of the great man's spirit had passed over into him.
"Thank you," he said quietly. Then he pressed the horseshoe into the
blue-veined hands, kissed them both and fled from the room.




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                            The Three Acts


That evening when Giorgio returned to Siena, the undercurrent of the
August Palio was running strong. The first act, the drawing of lots
of the contradas, had already taken place, and the flags of the ten
who would run were flying from the Palazzo Pubblico. As Giorgio stood
in the Piazza looking, the torment in him began again. If only by
some miracle the flag with the sea-shell were missing, then whichever
contrada drew Gaudenzia would surely ask him to race her. But of
course, the flag was there, as he knew it had to be, and he was bound
irretrievably to Nicchio, the Shell.

Feeling trapped and helpless, he hurried at once to the stable to see
how Gaudenzia had fared. She was always a surprise to him each time
he saw her, always belonging to him more closely--the pricked ears
listening, the dark eyes asking, the nostrils fluttering in a welcome
that said more than any words.

"See!" he said quite out of breath, "I come _presto_, _pronto_,
_subito_. For you, too, was this day endless like eternity?" He let
the mare lip his shirtsleeve, not minding the warm wetness nor the
greenish tint from the hay she'd been munching. "I got to tell you,"
he said soberly, "there is now only one chance in ten you will have
me for fantino in the August Palio. If Nicchio does not draw you...."
He turned away and grabbed a pitch-fork with both hands. The mare was
already bedded for the night, but with slow, forceful motions he shook
up and freshened the straw. Then he waited until she buckled her knees
and lay down in contentment before he left her and went to his own bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days until the Palio were cut to a pattern and moved on schedule.
Seven days before, the workmen dumped cartloads of yellow-red earth and
tamped it down on the track. Four days before, carpenters put up tier
upon tier of seats in front of the palace buildings, and the chest-high
railing to fence the spectators within the shell.

Three days before came the second big act of the Palio--the trials
to determine which horses were strong and stout enough to negotiate
the course. The day was clear, the air still fresh with morning. An
expanding crowd was filling up the newly erected seats. There was no
shrieking or yelling yet. The people were murmuring, waiting.

At the express wish of the Chief-of-the-Guards, Giorgio rode Gaudenzia
in the trials. Again he held her in, and again she obeyed, acting
almost sedate in her performance. Some of the new horses shied at the
ropes, were afraid to enter between them, and some lurched and sprawled
at the hairpin curves. And so the heats, in batteries of five, had
to be run again and again until the judges were ready to make their
decisions. Then behind closed doors the secret voting took place while
the fantinos waited tensely in the court of the Palazzo and the crowd
in the Piazza began chanting for the favorites:

"Give us U-gan-da!"

"Give us Gau-den-zia!"

"Give us Pin-noc-chio!"

At last a deputy stepped importantly into the courtyard with a page at
heel like a well-trained dog. At a command from the deputy, the page
took numbered discs from a box and fastened one on the cheekstrap of
each of the ten horses chosen. At the moment he fastened the number 6
on Gaudenzia's bridle, a horseboy took hold of her reins. He almost had
to pry Giorgio's hands loose. "Let go!" he said in annoyance. "Let go!"

Giorgio, with the other fantinos, was ordered into the Piazza. They
stood shoulder to shoulder in front of the long table with the two
urns on it. Three times he had witnessed this third act before the
Palio--the assignment of the horses. Three times he had watched twin
pageboys draw the wooden capsules from the urns. Three times he had
watched the Mayor's hands tremble and the captains' faces pale.

And three times he had stood in this same strip of shade made by
the Mangia Tower, with the ten grooms in front of him, waiting to
lead away their charges in joy or sorrow, and behind him the anxious
contradaioli, repeating the phrase he had grown to hate: "_Fate is
Queen of the Palio._"

Like the Mayor himself, Giorgio was beginning to tremble. Not just his
hands; he was shaking all over. Perspiration trickled freely down his
back as the capsules were opened and the pairing began.

"Uganda to the Snail!"

The clamor was loud in Giorgio's ears, growing with each announcement.

"Dorina to the Panther!" Poor Dorina, he thought, always running, never
winning.

"Gaudenzia to the Giraffe!"

"Rosella to Nicchio, the Shell!"

Giorgio had heard all he needed to hear. The capsules had sealed his
doom. A horrified gasp broke from his throat. It was the same sound he
had made when he hit the cobblestones with Turbolento.

The ritual of the assignment went on. But for Giorgio it was over. It
was done.

He watched Rosella and Gaudenzia going off with their grooms, each
surrounded by joyful contradaioli. The spectators, too, were melting
away--going home, going into cafés, returning to work. The captains
and the Mayor vanished into the communal hall. Only Giorgio and the
pigeons were left. And in a silent semi-circle behind him three tall
youths from Nicchio had taken up their positions as his bodyguards.
He turned to them. In a daze he shook their hands, and in a daze
smiled crookedly at their small talk. The pigeons, in their pigeon-toed
gait, waddled around them. He envied the birds, earthbound one moment,
soaring into sky the next. He reached into his pocket and scattered
a few kernels of oats, and watched the airborne ones come in for
a landing. One perched on his shoulder, eyeing him with a shiny
shoe-button eye.

"Our fantino, he thinks he is St. Francis!" a guard laughed, not
unkindly.

Giorgio remembered the time Emilio had said almost the same words, and
suddenly he longed to be at home in the two little rooms in Monticello.
Forlornly, he followed the guards to his new sleeping room in the
quarters of Nicchio. He had half a mind to steal out tonight and go
back to the Maremma, but if he did, it would be only his body that left.

The Captain of Nicchio, Signor de Santi, came later in the afternoon to
see him. For a moment Giorgio felt a spear of hope. Perhaps Giraffa and
Nicchio had exchanged fantinos, and the Captain had come with the news.

It was a cruel hope, dashed almost as it was born. Sensing the boy's
unhappiness, the Captain said, "Son, you are a fantino, not a mere
horseboy. On this mount, or that, you must win. Rosella is a big, rangy
mare and she, too, has good possibilities."

Giorgio made no answer. Empty of feeling, he managed to live out the
afternoon. Toward evening the Chief-of-the-Guards came to him. "It will
be some comfort," he said, "for you to ride Gaudenzia tonight in the
first Prova. Of course, you understand," he added, "it will be in this
one only."

But it was no comfort at all. It was like digging at a wound so that it
could bleed anew. He let Gaudenzia win the first Prova, lengths ahead
of the others. No one had challenged her.

On the morning of the second day he rode the rangy Rosella. Captain
de Santi gave his orders beforehand. "Make the getaway clear from the
ropes, and the gallop light. In all the Provas, her strength and vigor
must be preserved."

Time passed for Giorgio. The minutes and the hours flowed on, sunup to
sundown, one Prova after another, and the pinch of pain spread until it
was a dull, dull aching.

In the Prova Generale, on the afternoon of the third day, tension
tightened among the fantinos. Each wanted to show his skill, to make
certain of being selected for the Palio itself. In July, Giorgio had
been tortured by the fear that his name would not be made official
in the archives. Now it did not matter. Again he brought Rosella in
safely, as his captain had ordered.

That evening, escorted by his bodyguard, he attended the great banquet
in the hall of Nicchio. Wearing the little jacket and the striped
trousers of the race, he sat at the head table, next to Captain de
Santi. There was joy and hospitality all about him ... people eating
their fill of chicken cacciatore and drinking the red wine from the
grapes of Tuscany. He tried to be one of them, but he was silent as a
nut in a shell, and the good food knotted in his throat. In his mind he
saw Monsignor Tardini in the cool, shuttered room of the Vatican, and
he saw the Umbrella Man sitting cross-legged at the fountain, and he
saw Gaudenzia without wanting to see her.

When it came his turn to stand up and face the members of Nicchio, he
did not fumble in his mind or in his pocketless jacket for any prepared
speech. He just got up and stood quiet a while. Then, remembering his
talk with the Monsignore, he said: "To Nicchio I will be loyal." It was
as if another's voice were speaking for him as he went on, "And the
orders of my Captain I will obey."




                              CHAPTER XXX

                      Duel Between Horse and Man


The hours of night flowed over Giorgio's sleeping room. He and his
guards were trying to settle down, but each heart was groping alone in
the dark, wondering which contrada would win tomorrow's Palio.

Giorgio knew that somewhere in remote and quiet places throughout the
city the captains were meeting in secret, making their agreements,
planning their strategy. Overnight the whole aspect of the Palio
could change. And tomorrow, he thought with a surge of hope, Captain
de Santi will come to me and say: "We of Nicchio generally live in a
state of neutrality. But last night we formed an alliance with Giraffa.
Therefore, your precise order in today's joust is to hinder the others
and help our ally to win. Since they have drawn Gaudenzia, you are
fortunate, thus, to fight for your mare. No?"

Or, better still, the Captain might say: "Vittorino! In the dark
watches of the night we changed our tactics. Our Rosella, it appears,
could finish maybe second or third, but not first. Therefore, we
release you to ride Gaudenzia for Giraffa, and we will engage a new
fantino."

In Giorgio's mind the Captain's speech grew long and lofty. "You see,
son," (he could even hear the tone of voice) "Giraffa has in the
past done us favors. We therefore hold in high esteem their sacred
friendship. It will be a beautiful sacrifice we make."

Hugging these hopes to him, he slept away what was left of the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

August 16, 1954. The day is new. Sky murky. Sun trying to tear the
clouds apart. Church bells tolling. Giorgio cannot run away now; does
not want to run away. There is still the hope. He prays with the other
fantinos, feels with them the pressure and the tension mounting. He
rides in the _Provaccia_, the last rehearsal. Bodily he is on Rosella;
heart and soul he rides Gaudenzia. Last night's hopes will come true;
_must_ come true! Perhaps at the last moment in the Hall of the
Magistrate it will happen. Captain de Santi will lean over and whisper
into his ear. He can do it easily. The hall is vast; two people can
feel alone.

But when the time came, there was no whispering; only the bold
pronouncement that Giorgio Terni, known as _Vittorino_, was official
fantino for Nicchio.

At half past two in the afternoon the embers of his hope flickered
again as the Captain strode into Giorgio's room.

"Vittorino!" the name slow-spoken as in the dream, and the syllables
far apart, like drops of rain when the storm begins.

Now it comes. Now he will say: "You, Vittorino, must give help to
Gaudenzia. The others you will block. With the nerbo you will fight
them fiercely, hinder them." The boy holds his breath. He takes a step
closer. He does not want even the guards to overhear. He cants his
head like a dog, begging, awaiting directions ... listening ... eyes
beseeching.

The Captain clips out his orders, _wanting_ the guards to hear: "Break
first from the rope! The hot bludgeons of the nerbo we wish you both to
escape."

There is still the hope; it is not yet dead.

"And during the last meters of the race"--the voice is grim--"you will
nerbo every opponent who threatens our victory. _Every_ opponent who
threatens...."

A wild sickness churns in the boy. He wants to escape and run and run
and run, but where to go? Fate has trapped him. Fate, the Queen of the
Palio.

Minutes and seconds wear themselves out. Numbly he puts on the long
stockings, the high buskins, the deep blue doublet with the emblem of
the white shell, the burnished sleeves of mail, the heavy helmet of
mail with the chinstrap too tight. He thinks wistfully of the rabbit's
fur he had once wrapped around Gaudenzia's chinstrap. How long ago that
seems!

He is ready. He goes to the church of Nicchio with Rosella. He hears
the priest invoke God's protection for horse and rider, hears the
people shout: "Go, Rosella! Come back victorious!"

Then, mounted on his parade horse, he receives the general blessing of
the Archbishop, his mind dazedly repeating the Captain's orders. He
makes his way to Il Campo, awaits his turn to enter. The bell in the
tower begins its tolling. His company moves forward. He enters the
square, sees again the many-headed multitude in the shallow basin of
the Piazza. He thinks: "So solid are they packed one could walk across
their heads without having to leap."

His mind and body are far apart. No longer does he want to be a
Sienese. He is an intruder, belonging neither to the present nor to the
past, but suspended in time. Staring hopelessly, he watches the figures
of the pageant move around the Piazza like wooden people on wooden
horses on a merry-go-round. He sees the mare Gaudenzia, proud-headed.
She is the only white one, the only Arabian. He feels a moment of pride.

Then the flags cut her off from sight and the numbness clutches him
again, and the merry-go-round figures go on and on until his head
dizzies with looking. At sight of the four great oxen pulling the
gilded battle car, he sighs in welcome relief. The merry-go-round is at
last coming to a stop.

The sun, too, is completing its orbit, shedding a soft light over Il
Campo. The multitude waits. Inside the courtyard Giorgio wants an end
to things. It seems a hundred hours, a hundred days, a hundred years
since the fateful orders were imposed. All right, then, let's go.
Change costumes! Put on the little jacket, the coarse pants. Eye your
opponents. Swing up, bareback. Take the hard nerbo in your hard hand.
Line up! Remember, it's war! Contrada against contrada! Not rider, not
mount, not flesh and blood, but symbols.... Eagle against Owl, Dragon
against Panther, Snail against Wave, Giraffe against me.

All right, then. Touch off the gunpowder! Let the flame belch! Let the
deafening percussion jar the ancient stones loose. Let the starter
spring the rope.

It is happening! Now!

Ten horses bursting into life, breaking from the ropes. Together! Ten
horses like a sudden blast of wind. But look! The swirling gust is
breaking apart, three horses striking through--two browns, one white.
The browns are the Snail and the Wave, the white is Gaudenzia. Under
a hail of blows the three in the lead round the easy curve beyond the
Fonte Gaia, begin their drive to the death-jaws of San Martino.

Sixty thousand throats shriek in horror. The Snail and the Wave are
heading crazedly for a crash. They collide! Two fantinos are spewed
into the air, go rolling ahead like tumbleweeds. Gaudenzia's rider
pulls her back, swerves her sharp around the bodies. She's in first
place!

Coming up from behind, Giorgio snakes Rosella between the riderless
horses, takes the curve, catches Gaudenzia on the straightaway, passes
her.

Did her nostrils pull in his scent as he went by? Did her ears pull in
his voice? If not, why is she jibbing her head; why is she weaving at
the lesser curve of the Casato? Tiring? She can't be! Not on the first
round with the whole width of the curve to herself.

For endless seconds she is unpredictable. Then she rears up, savagely
rakes the air, deliberately tosses her fantino! She's free! With a wild
spurt she tries to catch Giorgio. The duel between horse and man is on!

"_Attento! Attento!_" Nicchio fans are screaming in frenzy, imploring
Giorgio: "Give it to us! Give us the Palio!"

But who knows the mind of a horse? Is some inner urge compelling
Gaudenzia to spend all of her fleetness and blood? Is the thunder and
ecstasy of the crowd like fierce music in her ears? Who can know?

For the entire second round she battles Giorgio for the lead,
catching him on the straightaways, thundering alongside him, only to
drop back when he blocks her at the curves.

"_Forza_, Gaudenzia! _Forza!_" Strangers and Sienese alike are yelling
for Gaudenzia.

Only the Nicchio fans are her enemies. "Knock off her spennacchiera!"
they cry to Giorgio. "Knock it off!"

Fifty meters to go! She is holding her own, pounding on, eye to eye
with Rosella.

In sickening guilt Giorgio remembers his orders ... lifts his nerbo,
aims at her spennacchiera. He misses! He feels the thud of his blow
against her neck. She falls back a moment, but immediately comes up
again. Desperately aiming higher, he strikes once more. The nerbo draws
a line of blood close to her ear, but the spennacchiera holds fast.
Again she falls back, and again she comes up, her strength intensified.

Doubled over, wincing, the boy strikes again, and then again, and sees
the bloody trail grow. Tears spill down his cheeks. "Only a few meters
left!" he cries inside. "Only one blow more." And before the screaming,
cursing multitude he deals it.

Bleeding and bewildered, Gaudenzia tries to pass on the outside, but
Giorgio blocks her. The flag of arrival is just ahead. He lifts his
nerbo, this time in the sign of victory, but to the gasps of the
multitude she cuts around behind him, knifes her body between Rosella
and the fence, thrusts her nose under his upraised arm--to win! By the
length of her red-scarred head she wins.

It is over. The duel is done. Giorgio falls sobbing into the waiting
arms of the Chief-of-the-Guards. The big man is sobbing, too. "Don't
cry, Giorgio. Don't look like that. You _had_ to do it. You just had
to!"




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                         At the Victory Dinner


It was long past midnight when Giorgio was allowed to enter Gaudenzia's
stable in the Contrada of the Giraffa. In his hands he carried a kit
containing boric acid, a jar of animal grease, and a piece of linen
torn from a once-fine tablecloth.

The mare had been lying asleep, but at the sound of the boy's voice
she struggled to her feet. He turned his head away. He could not bring
himself to face her. Not even glancing in her direction, he asked
permission of the barbaresco to treat her wounds.

With a look of understanding the man nodded his consent. "This Palio
must have been for you like a bang in the stomach," he said.

Silently Giorgio tore the length of linen into strips. He sopped
several in the solution of boric acid. He wrung them out. He doused
them again, wrung them out again.

"How many times you going to do that?" the barbaresco asked. "How is it
you can face San Martino, but not her? Some time you got to do it."

Miserable, torn by conscience, Giorgio walked tremblingly toward her.
Staring at the floor, still unable to look up, he took one step and
then another. He felt himself grown suddenly old and bent under his
burden of guilt. He wished the distance between them would stretch out
and with each step courage would flow into him, but already he was so
close he could feel her breath. He closed his eyes, prayed, then forced
them to focus on her, and he almost cried, he felt so happy. Even with
the red welts she was still beautiful! There was a new quality about
her, a kind of spiritual quality, as if she had come through a fire,
untouched. Her eyes were fixed on him and they were soft and amber-lit,
and the nostrils fluttered and made a little sound, and the ears asked
for talk as if this reunion were just like all the others--warm and
wonderful and good.

Giorgio gulped. If only she had laid back her ears and come charging
at him, or taken a bite through his shirt, fierce enough to show for a
lifetime. And though he wanted to sink down upon his knees, and laugh
and cry both, and beg forgiveness, yet at sight of the barbaresco
watching he went to work like some veterinarian. He washed the cuts
across her forehead, and the cross-cuts behind her ear. Then, with the
gentlest of fingers, he rubbed the grease into them.

"Gaudenzia!" he said when he had finished ministering. "Now there
should be no scars. Those reminders I could not bear. Do you know,"
he added under his breath, "do you _understand_ that you won all by
yourself--like the little clay model in Monticello?"

The mare pricked her ears. Whatever it was the boy had said made a nice
melody. She raised her head and let out a whinny that bounced back and
forth from the stone walls again and again until it faded in a trembly
echo. "I bear you no ill will," it said, more plainly than any words.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few stars were still winking bright and alive when Giorgio left
Gaudenzia and walked purposefully to the post office. He had often sent
night telegrams for Signor Ramalli. Now he would send one for himself.

The pen on the counter was forked and rusty and the ink lumpy, but the
words uncorked themselves like strong wine.

    YOUR EXCELLENCE MONSIGNOR TARDINI. I LOST BUT GAUDENZIA WON. BY
    HERSELF. SHE PAID NO ATTENTION TO ARRANGEMENTS. CAN YOU ATTEND
    HER VICTORY DINNER FOR ONDA NEXT MONTH? SHE WILL EAT AT HEAD TABLE
    WITH OFFICIALS AND ME. IF YOU HAVE FORGOT ME I AM GIORGIO TERNI
    ALSO VITTORINO.

The sleepy-eyed clerk squinted out from behind the window of his cage
and accepted the message with a loud yawn. As he read it, he snapped
sharply awake. "To _Monsignor Tardini_!" he gasped. "Is it _urgente_?
And have you the money?"

Giorgio felt in his pocket. "Si, si!" he laughed. "At once it must go."

It was a nice twist of fate that the victory dinner for Gaudenzia's win
for the Onda was held in September after her riderless victory for the
Giraffa. It made the Onda dinner more important and exciting. Giorgio
as her fantino in the first race received a command invitation from
General Barbarulli.

And so, on the twenty-sixth day of September, at eight o'clock in the
evening, he set out full of eagerness, and in his good suit, for the
Contrada of the Onda. On all sides he was met and joined by happy
contradaioli going his way.

As he climbed the steep, cobbly streets, an old saying of his father's
jumped into his mind. "An end is just a beginning. The dog chases his
tail, and that is the way of life; the end and the beginning, they
meet!" His mother always laughed then and said the same thing, but not
using dogs' tails. "Sunsets are very beautiful sight," she would say,
"because they make not an end, but a promise."

The promise was so beautiful it made Giorgio frightened and tremulous
with joy at the same time. "It will be that way with Gaudenzia," he
thought. "She is only beginning to use her powers, her blood by Sans
Souci." He strode faster, passing some of the people who had before
passed him. Everywhere people were pouring out of doorways, going to
pay homage to a cart horse of great valor. Tonight he was one of
them ... a Sienese. He loved every ancient stone of the city. Nowhere
else had he ever felt history as something holy, eternally engraved in
stones and in mind and soul.

The Chief-of-the-Guards caught up with him, put a protecting arm around
his shoulder. "I bring you two messages," he said in a voice strangely
husky. "Affairs of state prevent Monsignor Tardini from attending." He
paused and tightened his lips to master his feelings. "And the other
news is...."

"Yes?" Giorgio felt a cold clutch of fear.

"Your Umbrella Man...."

"What about him?"

"Coming here, on his way to celebrate Gaudenzia's victory, he died."

"He--_what_?"

"He got as far as my house, with a beautiful green umbrella for you ...
not oiled cloth, but silk! Real silk!"

Giorgio's throat went dry. He knew he ought to say something, but it
was queer how he felt, as if someone had put a heavy hand on his chest
and another on his back between the shoulder blades and the two hands
pressed and pressed until all the breath was squeezed out of him. Why
was it always like this? Why always the joy choked by sorrow?

"Giorgio," the Chief said softly, "do not grieve. Uncle Marco was a
very old man. He saw many, many Palios. And he died smiling. 'Tell
little Giorgio Terni,' he said, 'tell him that way, way back when he
was a knee-high boy, my story-telling begat a very fine fantino!'"

Giorgio listened. As he walked arm-in-arm with the Chief, he put the
news in a deep chamber of his heart and drew a curtain over it, not of
forgetting but of warm remembrance. The pilgrimage to Onda included the
seen and the unseen now.

They had reached the Via Giovanni Duprè, and they both went through
the archway and stopped short, transfixed by what they saw. Before
them the wavy street, which had given to the contrada its strange
name, The Wave, was a mosaic of brilliant lights and colors--glowing,
surging, colors--all the colors of the sea when the sun throws millions
of sparkles on it. And there, ablaze in front of the noble old church
of San Giuseppe, hung the Palio banner that Gaudenzia had won! It
too was like the sea, catching all the rays of light and sending
them out again. At its sides two dolphins swam in an ocean of blue,
their tongues spurting living flames. And under the banner and the
sweeping arc of lights, and under the flags flying, and the flowers
cascading from windows and balconies, hundreds of tables were laid with
snowy-white cloths. But no one was seated. People were milling about,
milling and singing and shouting.

Giorgio suddenly found himself pulled into their midst, and friends
and strangers alike were pumping his hand and slapping his back and
saluting him on both cheeks. General Barbarulli stood laughing at his
bewilderment. He beckoned him to the head table, for coming up a side
street was Gaudenzia with her barbaresco.

The crowd made a little corridor for Giorgio to pass, and another for
Gaudenzia, so that soon they would meet at the head table. But Giorgio
arrived first and he saw her coming toward him with that wonderfully
long stride of hers. She looked more like a painting than real,
with the embroidered velvet horsecloth thrown over her body and the
blue-and-white plumes nodding in her headstall. But what made his heart
leap was that her scars did not show!

Nearby and far off, the contradaioli shouted, "Behold our Queen!" And
in their fervor they rushed to kiss her, to fling their arms about
her, but she flattened her ears and laid her teeth bare. The crowd
applauded, admiring her spirit. "Let her fantino greet her for us," an
old man called out.

Giorgio went to her, and eye to clear eye was threaded. For a long
second he let her snuff the quiet of his hands. Then with her
barbaresco he accompanied her to the manger at the head table. It was
brimful of oats, with apples and carrots sliced in among the plump
kernels. Knowing her love of salt, he picked up a shaker from the
table and salted her dinner well.

"Buon appetito!" someone cried, and immediately Gaudenzia plunged her
muzzle into the manger as if she understood the toast.

Joy rose to incredible heights. Fingers that failed to touch Gaudenzia
now reached out and touched Giorgio as he took his place between
Captain Tortorelli and the General.

At last the feast that was weeks in the preparing was brought
in--plates of antipasto, platters of steaming chicken, and bowls of
spaghetti in meat sauce. It surprised Giorgio that he was heaping his
plate high, eating with gusto, and singing between mouthfuls, singing
at the top of his lungs.

"Of you we are proud!" the General beamed. "You eat and sing for the
Umbrella Man, too. He was a fine eater, that one."

The speeches came next. Long ones, short ones. But Giorgio enjoyed most
the tributes addressed to Gaudenzia directly: "Thank you, Gaudenzia,
for the beautiful Palio you have conquered for us; for the rewarding of
our secret, tenacious belief in you. Have your sensitive ears heard the
saying: '_Fate_ is Queen of the Palio'? Believe it not. For now there
is a new Queen, and her name is _Gaudenzia_!"

The applause was like a volcano erupting, like a crashing of thunder,
like a dike opened in flood time. Giorgio forgot he was at the
head table with all the dignitaries. He rose to his feet shouting
"Bravissima!" with the populace; "Bravissima, Gaudenzia, the Queen!"

When the roar and thunder subsided, the General grew serious. "The
time has come," he said thoughtfully, earnestly, "to reflect upon the
ancient yet always new spectacle of the Palio. Already the victory
of July seems far away, and already we know the noble results of
the August Palio. But," he leaned toward the multitude, his eyes
glistening, "in nine months and twenty-nine days the yellow-ochre earth
will again cover the cobbles of the Piazza, and again memory and hope
will kindle the massive heart of Siena. This Palio is forever written
into the archives. Now we turn to a new page."

The victory feast was ended. The band players were striking up once
more the sweet, haunting "March of the Palio." People were running
toward the banner to kiss it in homage. The waiters were clearing the
tables. The barbaresco was leading Gaudenzia away. Giorgio gave the man
his moment of glory. Tomorrow would be time enough to call for her from
the fine stable of Onda and walk her back home to the Maremma. Yes,
tomorrow would be time enough....

The echo of drums accompanied Giorgio as he walked down into the city
for a last look at Il Campo. A harvest moon bulged out from behind the
Mangia Tower, washing the palaces in a pale red glow. He listened a
while to the fountain playing its tinkly tune in the vastness.

"Nine months and twenty-nine days is not so very far away, he thought.
"Why, that is less time than it takes a mare to foal a colt!"




And Now....


With all of his heart Giorgio Terni believed that Gaudenzia's first
victories were only a beginning. And so they were. Proving herself
queen, she went on to win the Extraordinary Palio that fall, held in
honor of the Marian Year. Giorgio was again her fantino. Thousands
of people shuddered as she flung herself at the starting rope, then
leaped over it before it touched the ground. From that moment on she
won the race majestically, unchallenged. It was her third victory in
succession. In all of Palio history no horse had ever done this before!

Strangely enough, Gaudenzia is famed, too, for _not_ racing. Because
of her spectacular record she was excluded from both Palios in the
following year. She was too great a threat to the other contenders. But
the next year, in deference to the will of the people, they allowed her
to race again. And again she won.

Where is Gaudenzia now? As befitting a queen, she lives in a medieval
castle near Siena, one with a history longer than the Palio. In this
eventful place where pacts were made and wars were plotted, she has her
stable-home. It is big and high-ceilinged, with windows that open wide
upon the sweeping hills of Tuscany.

Is she lonely there? Perhaps. But in the months to come there may be
a colt for her to nurse, and to teach to race. Meanwhile, she has a
hunting dog for company, a groom to exercise her, and visitors from
near and far--as far away as America. Most of them she eyes in an aloof
and regal manner, permitting none to touch her. She seems always to be
looking through and beyond them, looking for a familiar slight-built
figure. Sometimes on a Sunday afternoon her looking is rewarded, for
among the visitors comes Giorgio, man-grown now.

Nostrils fluttering, she sifts the mixture of scents, sorting and
discarding until she finds the right one. Then with a small whicker of
remembering, she reaches out to welcome him.

Always their reunion is the same. Giorgio extends his open hand,
and after she has licked the salt from it, she playfully nips his
shirtsleeve and snuffs his hair. Always it is like this. Never any
demanding, "Where were you last Sunday?" Only her eyes holding his, and
her ears flicked for the tone of his voice.

"Gaudenzia," he tells her, "the others cannot hold the candle to you.
You are still the pride of the Palio, and I'll be back to see you
again, maybe in the time of the little fingernail moon or when the moon
is full. Maybe both times!"

And usually he is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_For helping her understand the mystery and meaning of the Palio, the
author is grateful to_:

LELIO BARBARULLI, Chief Magistrate of the Contrada Onda, and
his daughter GLORIA, Siena

GIUSEPPE BOSI, guide, Siena

EZIO CANTAGALLI, President of Ente Provinciale per il Turismo,
Siena

TAMI GUROVICH CASCINO, Professor of Literature, Siena

GIORGIO CELLI, Doctor of Accounting, Banca Monte dei Paschi di
Siena

MARIO CELLI, Manager of the newspaper _Il Campo di Siena_, and
his daughter PAULA, Siena

MARIO CHIGIOTTI, Manager of Ente Provinciale per il Turismo,
Siena

ANGELINA CIAMBELLOTTI, President of Centro Italiano Femminile,
Siena

EGIDIO CORSINI, Vicar of the Contrada Giraffa, Siena

MARIO COSTANTI, Castello Medioevale di Bibbiano Buonconvento,
Tuscany

DOROTHA DAWSON, Supervisor of School Libraries, and JULIA
COE, Detroit, Michigan

FINI DEMOLITO, Captain of the Contrada Giraffa, Siena

VITTORIO DE SANTI, Captain of the Contrada Nicchio, Siena

ETTORE FONTANI, owner of many Palio horses, Siena

BENITO GIACHETTI, Chief of the Guards, Siena

VASCO GIUSTI, Contrada Giraffa, Siena

GIOVANNI GOVERNATO, interpreter and Doctor of Accounting,
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena

GUIDO GUIDARINI, official starter of the race, Siena

RUTH HARSHAW, conductor of "Carnival of Books" radio program,
Chicago

VERONICA HUTCHINSON, author and book buyer, Halle's,
Cleveland, Ohio

RICHARD A. KNOBLOCK, Colonel, U.S. Air Force, American
Embassy, Rome

ALDO LENZI, Doctor of Veterinary Science, Siena

KATHERINE LINDSAY, translator, Wayne, Illinois

ALDO LUSINI, editor of the periodical _Terra di Siena_

CONTE GOFFREDO MANFREDI, Rome

TOMMASO MASINI, Secretary to the Mayor of Siena

DELLA MCGREGOR, Chief of Youth Services, Public Library, St.
Paul, Minnesota

MARIO NERI, President of Cine Club, Siena

ALFREDO PIANIGIANI, owner of many Palio horses, Siena

VINCENZO RAMALLI, owner of many Palio horses, and his daughter
ANNA, Siena

MARIO ROSSETTI, Doctor of Accounting, Banca Monte dei Paschi
di Siena

NELLO SAINATI, Westchester, Illinois, who vividly re-created
the Tuscany of his boyhood

RENATO SENESI, Manager of the Azienda Autonoma del Turismo,
Siena

ERICA STOPPINI, counselor and friend, and her daughter
MARIA LUISA, Siena

ROBERTA SUTTON, mentor, Chicago, Illinois

DOMENICO CARDINAL TARDINI, Secretary of State of the Vatican

GIORGIO TERNI, his mother, his father, his sister
TERIA and his brother EMILIO, Monticello Amiata

THE MOST REVEREND MARIO TOCCABELLI, Archbishop of Siena

ADRIANO TORTORELLI, Captain of the Contrada Onda, Siena

All the boys of Villa Nazareth and their teachers, Rome

WILLIAM WINQUIST, horseman, Wayne, Illinois

RAIMONDO ZALAFFI, journalist, Siena


                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAUDENZIA, PRIDE OF THE
PALIO ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
